I don't know whether the time is 10:30
or 10:45 but there is a vote scheduled
on the Senate floor it's my intention to
keep the meeting going during that vote
and we'll take turns going so somebody
needs to be here presiding while I go
vote and I won't
how run over and run back and and we'll
we'll do the questioning according to
the fall of the gavel or our early birds
whichever rule applies director Comey
welcome
we thank the FBI for what it does to
keep America safe there's been a lot of
controversy surrounding the FBI since
the last time you were here in 2015 in
March you publicly acknowledged that the
FBI is investigating allegations of
coordination between the Trump campaign
and Russia's effort to interfere in the
2016 election under President Obama's
order former DNI clapper had been in
charge of the intelligence community's
review of that inference mr. clapper
testified that President Obama asked the
intelligence community to compile all
available information after he left
office mr. clapper said there was no
evidence of collusion whatsoever the New
York Times reported that American
officials found no proof of collusion so
where is all this speculation about
collusion coming from in January
BuzzFeed published a dossier spinning
wild conspiracy theories about the Trump
campaign BuzzFeed acknowledged that the
claims were unverified and some of the
details were clearly wrong BuzzFeed has
since been sued for publishing them
since then much of the dossier has been
proven wrong and many of his outlandish
claims have failed to gain traction for
example no one's looking for moles or
Russian agents embedded
in the dnc yet some continue to quote
parts of this document as if it were
gospel truth and according to press
reports the FBI has relied on the
document to justify its current
investigation there have been reports
that the FBI agreed to pay the author of
the dossier who paid his sources who
also paid their sub sources where did
the money come from and what motivated
the people writing the checks the
company that oversaw the dossiers
creation fusion GSP won't speak to that
point either its founder Glenn Simpson
is refusing to cooperate with this
company's committees invest
investigation and inquiry his company is
also the subject of a complaint to the
Justice Department that complaint
alleges that fusion worked as an
unregistered foreign agent for Russian
interest and with the former Russian
intelligence agency at the time it
worked on the dossier it was filed with
the Justice Department in July long
before the dossier came out the man who
wrote the dossier admitted in court that
it has unverified claims does that sound
like a reliable basis for law
enforcement or intelligence actions
unfortunately the FBI has provided me
materially inconsistent information
about these issues that is why we need
to know more about it how much the MV I
relied on it once you buy into the claim
of collusion then suddenly ever
interaction with a Russian can be
twisted to seem like confirmation of a
conspiracy theory now I obviously don't
know what the FBI will find for the good
of the country I hope that the FBI gets
to the truth soon whatever that truth or
that answer
maybe if there are wrong doors they
should be punished and the innocent
should have their names cleared and in
the meantime this committee is charged
with the oversight of the FBI and we
can't wait until this is all over to ask
the hard questions otherwise too many
people will have no confidence in FBI's
conclusions the public needs to know
what role the dossier has played and
where it came from and we need to know
whether there was anything improper
going on between the Trump campaign and
the Russians or are these mere
allegations just a partisan smear
campaign that manipulated our government
into choosing chasing a conspiracy
theory now before the election and
before we knew about this notorious
dossier you Chairman Comey publicly
released his findings that secretary
Clinton's was extremely careless in the
handling of highly classified
information and this recommendation has
no-one and and his recommendation that
no one be prosecuted according to a
recent New York Times article he did it
partly because he knew the Russians had
a hacked email from a Democrat operative
that might be released before the
election that email reportedly provided
assurances that attorney general Lynch
would protect Secretary Clinton and make
sure the FBI quote/unquote didn't go too
far
despite Attorney General Lynch's prior
connections to the Clintons and are now
famous private conversation with former
President Clinton during the
investigation she failed to recuse
herself from that the in director's
announcement effectively gave her cover
to have it both ways she would appear
publicly uninvolved but remain and
control the ultimate outcome moreover in
its hasty and
tough politically-charged investigation
the FBI failed to follow up on credible
evidence of the intent to hide hide
federal records from the Congress and
the public it is a federal crime as we
know to willfully and unlawfully conceal
remove or destroy a federal record
director Comey said that quote the FBI
also discovered several thousands
work-related emails end of quote that
Secretary Clinton did not turn over to
the State Department
he said the secretary Clinton's lawyers
quote cleaned their devices in such a
way as to preclude complete forensic
recovery integral of additional emails
the Justice Department also entered into
immunity agreements limiting the scope
of the FBI investigation some of these
agreements prohibited the FBI from
reviewing any emails on the laptops of
the Clinton aides that were created
outside of secretary Clinton's tenure at
state but of course any emails related
to alienating records would not have
been created until after she left office
during the congressional FBI reviews and
even though these records were subject
to congressional subpoena and
preservation records the Justice
Department agreed to destroy the laptops
so a cloud of doubt hangs over the FBI
objectivity the director says that the
people at the FBI don't give a rip about
politics but the director installed as
deputy director a man whose wife ran for
elected office and accepted almost a
million dollars from Governor Terry
McAuliffe a longtime friend and
fundraiser of the Clintons and the
Democratic Party Andrew McCabe also
reportedly met a person with Governor
McAuliffe's
office about his wife's political plans
and he did not recuse himself from the
Clinton investigations or the write of
matter despite the obvious appearance of
conflict the Inspector General is
reviewing these issues but once again
the people deserve answers and the FBI
has not provided those answers
we need the FBI to be accountable
because we need the FBI to be effective
its mission is to protect us from the
most dangerous threats facing our nation
and as a director was last here since
the director was last here the drumbeat
of attacks on the United States from
those directed or inspired by Isis and
other radical Islamic terrorists has
continued for example in June 2016 a
terrorist killed 49 and wounded another
53 in Orlando frequently frequented by
gay and lesbian community
it was the most deadly attack in the
United States soil since 9/11 but long
afterwards in September a terror stabbed
ten at a mall in Minneapolis and another
terrace injured 31 after he detonated
bombs in New Jersey in New York City and
in November a terrace injured 13 after
driving into students and teachers at
Ohio State University our allies haven't
been immuned either as we read in the
newspaper frequently we all recall the
tragedy of July 2016 when terrorists
plowed a truck through a crowd in France
killing over 80 people so we in the
Congress need to make sure that the FBI
has the tools it needs to prevent and
investigate terrorism as well as other
series by violent crimes and these tools
must be must adapt to both evolving
technology and threats while preserving
our civil liberties I hope we can also
hear from the director about the FBI's
use of some of these tools that may
require Congress's attention and most
obviously the FISA section 702 Authority
is up for reauthorization at the end of
the year this Authority provides the
government the ability to collect the
electronic communications of foreigners
outside the United States with a
compelled assistance of American
companies and Bush and Obama
administrations were strongly
supportive of 702 and now the Trump
administration is as well from all
accounts the law has proven to be highly
effective in helping to protect the
United States and her allies the privacy
and civil liberties oversight board and
many other federal courts have found
section 702 constitutional and
consistent with our fourth amendment yet
questions and concerns persist for many
about its effects on our civil liberties
specifically in the way the FBI queries
data collected under section 702 in
order in addition the director has
spoken out often about how the use of
encryption by terrorists and criminals
is eroding the effectiveness of one of
the FBI's core investigative tools a
warrant based on probable cause I look
forward to an update from you director
Comey on going dark problem I'm also
waiting for answers from the FBI's
advanced knowledge of an attempted
terrorist attack 2015 Garland Texas
fortunately the attack was interrupted
by local police officer but not before a
guard was shot after the attack the
director claimed that the FBI did not
have advanced knowledge of it but it was
recently revealed that an undercover FBI
agent was in close communication with
one of the attackers and the weeks
leading up to the attack the undercover
agent was in a car directly behind the
attackers when they started shooting and
fled the scene the committee needs
clarity on what the FBI knew whether
there was plans to disrupt any attack
and whether it shared enough information
with local law enforcement and obviously
you expect me to always remind you about
whistleblowers finally as you know the
FBI whistleblower protection Enhancement
Act became law December 2016 it
clarified that FBI employees are
protected when they disclose wrongdoing
to their supervisors in April we learned
that the FBI still has not updated its
policies and done much to educate
employees on the new law the Inspector
General gave the
P I updated training this past January
employees who know that they're
protected are more likely to come
forward with evidence of waste fraud and
abuse they should not have to wait many
months to be trained on such a
significant change in their rights and
their protections and these are all
important issues and I look forward to
discussing them with you director Comey
the public's faith of the FBI Congress
and our democratic process has been
tested lately oversight and transparency
hopefully will restore that faith you
may take as long as you want sir
thanks very much mr. chairman mr.
chairman as you stated this is the
committee's annual oversight hearing to
conduct that oversight of the FBI
so usually we review and ask questions
about the FBI's work that ranges from
major federal law enforcement priorities
to the specific concerns of individual
members of the committee
however this hearing takes place at a
unique time last year for the first time
the FBI and its investigation of a
candidate for president became the
center of the closing days of a
presidential election before voters went
to the polls last November they had been
inundated with stories about the FBI's
investigation of Senator Clinton's
emails the press coverage was
wall-to-wall every day there was another
story about secretary Clinton's emails
every day questions were released a
classic everyday questions were raised
about whether classified information had
been released or compromised and over
and over again
there was commentary from the FBI about
its actions and investigation on July
5th 2016 two months before the election
director Comey publicly announced that
the FBI had concluded its investigation
and determine that no reasonable
prosecutor would bring a case against
Secretary Clinton that should have been
the end of the story but it wasn't 11
days before the election on October 28th
2016 director Comey then announced that
the FBI was reopening the Clinton
investigation because of emails on
Anthony Weiner's computer this explosive
announcement and it was came unprompted
and without knowing whether a single
email warranted a new investigation it
was in fact a big October Surprise but
in fact as it turned out not one email
on the laptop changed the FBI's original
conclusion that no prosecution was
warranted and only two days before the
election the FBI sent another public
letter to Congress affirming its
original conclusion this was
extraordinary plain and simple I joined
those who believe that the actions taken
by the FBI did in fact have an impact on
the election what's worse is that while
all of this was going on in the public
spotlight while the FBI was discussing
its investigation into senator Clinton's
email server in detail I cannot help but
note that it was noticeably silent about
the investigation into the Trump
campaign and Russian interference into
the election in June 2016 the Press
reported that Russian hackers had
infiltrated the computer system of the
Democratic National Committee in
response then candidate Trump and his
campaign began goading the Russian
government into hacking Secretary
Clinton two months later in August on
Twitter
Roger stone declared trust me it will
soon be Podesta's time in the barrel and
quote he then bragged that he was in
communication with WikiLeaks and this
was during a campaign the campaign in
Florida he told a group of Florida
Republicans that founder Julian Assange
said that founder Julian Assange and
that there wouldn't be no telling what
the October Surprise might be and quote
clearly he knew what he was talking
about two months later on October 7
thousands of emails from John Podesta's
account were published on Wikileaks we
now know that through the fall election
the FBI was actively investigating
Russia's efforts to interfere with the
presidential campaign and possible
involvement of Trump campaign officials
in those efforts
yet the FBI remained silent in fact the
FBI Samara Lee refused to even
acknowledge the existence of any
investigation it's still very unclear
and I hope director that you will clear
this up why the FBI's treatment of these
two investigations was so dramatic Lee
different with the Clinton email
investigation it has been said that
quote exceptional circumstances and
quote including the high interest in the
matter and the need to reassure the
public required public comment from the
FBI however I can't imagine how an
unprecedented big and bold hacking
interference in our election by the
Russian government did not also present
exceptional circumstances as I said at
the beginning we're in a unique time a
foreign adversary had actively interfere
with a presidential election the FBI was
investigating
getting not just that interference but
whether campaign officials associated
with the president were connected to
this interference and the Attorney
General has recused himself from any
involvement in this investigation at the
same time the FBI must continue to work
with its state and local law enforcement
partners and the intelligence community
as well to investigate crime of all
types violent crime increased narcotic
trafficking fraud human trafficking
terrorism child exploitation public
corruption and yesterday this committee
had a very important hearing on hate and
crimes against specific religions and
races which are off the charts in order
to do all of that I firmly believe it is
of the utmost importance that the
American people have faith and trust in
the nation's top law enforcement agency
we must be assured that all of the FBI's
decisions are made in the interests of
justice not in the interest of any
political agenda or reputation of any
one agency or individual so mr. director
today we need to hear how the FBI will
regain that faith and trust
we need straightforward answers to our
questions and we want to hear how you're
going to lead the FBI going forward we
never ever want anything like this to
happen again Thank You mr. chairman
Tommy I'd like to swear you in at this
point you are firm you affirm that the
testimony you're about to give before
the committee to be the truth the whole
truth and nothing but the truth so help
you God thank you very much as the old
saying goes for somebody as famous as
you
introduction so I'm going to just
introduce you as director of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation but to once
again thank you for being here today and
we look forward to your testimony and
answer to our questions you may begin
Thank You mr. chairman senator Feinstein
members of the committee thank you for
having this annual oversight hearing
about the FBI I know that sounds a
little bit like someone saying they're
looking forward to going to the dentist
but I really do mean it
I think oversight of the FBI of all
parts of government but especially the
one I'm lucky enough to lead is
essential I think it was John Adams who
wrote to Thomas Jefferson that power
always thinks it has a great soul the
way you guard against that is having
people ask hard questions ask good
questions and demand straightforward
answers and I promise you I will do my
absolute best to give you that kind of
answer today I also appreciate the
conversation I know we're going to have
today and over the next few months about
reauthorizing section 702 of the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act that you
mentioned mr. chairman this is a tool
that is essential to the safety of this
country I did not say the same thing
about the collection of telephone
dialing information by the NSA I think
that's a useful tool 702 is an essential
tool and if it goes away we will be less
safe as a country and I mean that and
we'll be happy to talk more about that
thank you for engaging on that so we can
tell the American people why this
matters so much and why we can't let it
go away as you know the magic of the FBI
that you oversee is its people and we
talk as we should a lot about our
counterterrorism work about our
counterintelligence work and I'm sure
we'll talk about that today
but I thought I would just give you some
idea of the work that's being done by
those people all over the country all
over the world every day every night all
the time and I pulled three cases that
happened and we're finished in the last
month just to illustrate it the first
was something I know that you followed
closely the plague of threats against
Jewish community centers that this
country experienced in the first few
months of this year children frightened
old people frightened terrifying threats
of bombs at Jewish institutions
especially the Jewish community
enters the entire FBI surged in response
to that threat working across all
programs all divisions are technical
wizards using our vital international
presence and using our partnerships
especially with the Israeli national
police we made that case and the
Israelis locked up the person behind
those threats and stopped that
terrifying plague against the Jewish
community centers second case I want to
mention is all of you know what a botnet
is these are the zombie armies of
computers that have been taken over by
criminals lashed together
in order to do tremendous harm to
innocent people
last month the FBI working with our
partners with the Spanish National
Police took down a botnet called a
kellyo spot net and locked up the
Russian hacker behind that botnet who
made a mistake that Russian criminals
sometimes make of leaving Russia and
visiting the beautiful city of Barcelona
and he's now in jail in Spain and the
good people's computers who had been
lashed to that zombie army have now been
freed from it and are no longer part of
a huge criminal enterprise and the last
one I'll mention is this past week for
the first time since Congress passed the
statute making it a crime in the United
States to engage in female genital
mutilation to mutilate little girls it's
been a felony in the United States since
1996 we made the first case last week
against doctors in Michigan for doing
this terrifying thing to young girls all
across the country with our partners in
the Department of Homeland Security we
brought a case against two doctors for
doing this to children this is among the
most important work we do protecting
kids especially and it was done by great
work that you don't hear about a lot all
across the country by the FBI it is the
honor of my life I know you look at me
like I'm crazy for saying this about
this job I love this work I love this
job and I love it because of the mission
and the people I get to work with some
of you whose work I just illustrated by
pulling those three cases from last
month but it goes on all the time all
around the country and we're safer for
it I love representing these people
speaking on their behalf and I look
forward to your questions today Thank
You mr. chairman and thank you for your
opening statement I'm going to start out
probably with a couple subjects you wish
I didn't bring up and then a third one
that I think everybody needs to hear
your opinion on a policy issue it is
frustrating when the FBI refuses to
answer this committee's questions but
leaks relevant information to the media
in other words they don't talk to us but
somebody talks to the media director
Comey have you ever been an anonymous
source in news reports about matters
relating to the Trump investigation or
the Clinton investigation never question
- one relatively related
have you ever authorized someone else at
the FBI to be an anonymous source in
news reports about the Trump
investigation or the Clinton
investigation no has any classified
information relating to President Trump
or his association Associates been
Declassified or and shared with the
media not to my knowledge
you testified before the House
Intelligence Committee that a lot of
classified matters have ended up in the
media recently without getting into any
particular article I want to emphasize
that without getting into any particular
article is there an investigation of any
leaks of classified information relating
to mr. Trump or his associates I don't
want to I don't want to answer that
question senator for reasons I think you
know there have been a variety of leaks
well leaks are always a problem but
especially in the last three to six
months and where there is a leak of
classified information the FBI if it's
our information makes a referral to the
Department of Justice or if it's another
agency's information they do the same
and then DOJ authorizes the opening of
an investigation I don't want to confirm
in an open setting whether there are any
investigations open you I want to
challenge you on that because the
government regularly acknowledges when
it's investigating classified leaks you
did that in the Valerie Plame case
what's the difference here well the most
important difference is I don't have
authorization from the department to
confirm any of the investigations
they've authorized and it may be that we
can get that at some point but I'm not
going to do it sitting here in an open
setting without having talked to them
then I can i you can expect me to follow
up on that offer
sure there are several senior FBI
officials who would have had access to
the classified information that was
leaked including yourself and the deputy
director so how can the Justice
Department guarantee the integrity of
the investigations without designating
an agency other than the FBI to gather
the facts and eliminate senior FBI
officials as suspect
well not going to answer about any
particular investigations but there are
I know of situations in the past where
if you think the FBI or its leadership
or suspects you have another
investigative agency support the
investigation by federal prosecutors it
can be done it has been done in
fast okay moving on to another subject
the New York Times recently reported
that the FBI had found a troubling email
among the ones the Russians Act from
Democrat operatives the email reportedly
provided assurances that attorney
general Lynch would protect Secretary
Clinton by making sure the FBI
investigation called unquote didn't go
too far
how and when did you first learn of this
document also who sent it and who
received it that's not a question I can
answer in this forum mr. chairman
because it would call for a classified
response I have briefed leadership of
the intelligence committees on that
particular issue but I can't talk about
it here you can expect me to follow up
with you on that point
sure what steps did the FBI take to
determine whether attorney general Lynch
had actually given assurances that the
political fix was in no matter what did
the FBI interview the person who wrote
the email if not why not I have to give
you the same answer I can't talk about
that in an unclassified setting okay
then you can expect me to follow up on
that I asked the FBI to provide this
email to the committee before today's
hearing why haven't you done so and will
you provide it by the end of this week
again T to react to that I have to give
a classified answer and I can't give it
sitting here so that means you can give
me the email I'm not confirming there
was an email sir I can't the subject is
classified and in an appropriate forum
I'd be happy to brief you on it but I
can't do it in an open hearing I assume
that other members of the committee
could have access to that briefing if
they want it I want to talk about going
dark director Comey a few years ago you
testified before the committee about
going dark problem and the inability of
law enforcement to
access encrypted data despite the
existence of a lawfully issued court
order you continue to raise this issue
in your public speeches speeches most
recently Boston College my question you
mentioned it again in your testimony
briefly but can you provide the
committee with a more detailed update on
the status of going dark problem and how
is it affected the FBI's ability to
access encrypted data has there been any
progress collaborating with the
technology sector to overcome any
problems at our hearing in 2015 you said
you didn't think legislation was
necessary at that time is that still
your view Thank You mr. chairman the
shadow created by the problem we call
going dark continues to fall across more
and more of our work take devices for
example the ubiquitous default the full
disk encryption on devices is affecting
now about half of our work first six
months of this fiscal year
FBI examiner's were presented with over
six thousand devices for which we had
lawful authorities search warrant a
court order to open and in 46 percent of
those cases we could not open those
devices with any technique that means
half of the devices that we encounter in
terrorism cases in counterintelligence
cases in gang cases in child pornography
cases cannot be opened with any
technique that is a big problem and so
the shadow continues to fall I'm
determined to continue to make sure the
American people and Congress know about
it I know this is important to the
president of the new Attorney General I
don't know yet how the new
administration intends to approach it
but it's something we have to talk about
because like you I care a lot about
privacy I also care an awful lot about
Public Safety and there continues to be
a huge collision between those two
things we care about so I look forward
to continuing that conversation mr.
chairman you didn't respond to the part
about do you still have the view that
legislation is not needed I don't know
the answer yet as I think I said I hope
I said last time we talked about this it
may require a legislative solution at
some point
the Obama administration was not in a
position where they were seeking
legislation I don't know yet how
President Trump intends to approach this
I know he spoke about it during the
campaign I know he cares about it but
it's premature for me to say senator
Feinstein director I have one question
regarding my opening comment and I view
it as a most important question and I
hope you will answer it why was it
necessary to announce 11 days before a
presidential election that you were
opening an investigation on a new
computer without any knowledge of what
was in that computer why didn't you just
do the investigation as you would
normally with no public announcement a
great question senator thank you
October 27th the investigative team that
had finished the investigation in July
focused on secretary Clinton's emails
asked to meet with me so I met with them
that morning late morning in my
conference room and they laid out for me
what they could see from the metadata on
this fella Anthony Weiner's laptop that
had been seized in an unrelated case
what they could see from the metadata
was that there were thousands of
secretary Clinton's emails on that
device including what they thought might
be the missing emails from her first
three months of Secretary of State we
never found any emails from her first
three months she was using a Verizon
blackberry then and that's obviously
very important because if there was
evidence that she was acting with bad
intent that's where it would be in the
first they weren't there look can I just
finish my answer senator and so they
came in and said we can see thousands of
emails from the Clinton email domain
including many many many from the
Verizon Clinton domain blackberry domain
they said we think we got to get a
search warrant to go get these and the
Department of Justice agreed we had to
go get a search warrant so I agreed I
authorized them to seek a search warrant
and then I faced a choice and I've lived
my entire career by the tradition that
if you can possibly avoid it you avoid
any action in the run-up to an election
that might have an impact whether it's a
dog catcher election or president of the
United States but i sat there that more
and I could not see a door labeled no
action here I could see two doors and
they were both actions one was labeled
speak the other was labeled concealed
because here's how I thought about it
I'm not trying to talk you into this but
I want you to know my thinking having
repeatedly told this Congress we are
done and there's nothing there there's
no case there there's no case there to
restart in a hugely significant way
potentially finding the emails that
would reflect on her intent from the
beginning and not speak about it would
require an act of concealment
in my view and so I stared at speak and
concealed speak would be really bad
there's an election in eleven days lordy
that would be really bad concealing in
my view would be catastrophic not just
to the FBI but well beyond and honestly
as between really bad and catastrophic I
said to my team were gotta walk into the
world of really bad I've got to tell
Congress that we're restarting this not
in some frivolous way in a hugely
significant way and the team also told
me we cannot finish this work before the
election and then they worked night
after night after night and they found
thousands of new emails they found
classified information on Anthony Weiner
somehow her emails are being forwarded
to Anthony Weiner including classified
information by her assistant Huma Abedin
and so they found thousands of new
emails and then called me the Saturday
night before the election and said
thanks to the wizardry of our technology
we've only had to personally read 6,000
we think we can finish tomorrow morning
Sunday and so I met with them and they
said we found a lot of new stuff we did
not find anything that changes our view
of her intent so we're in the same place
we were in July it hasn't changed our
view and I asked them lots of questions
and I said okay if that's where you are
then I also have to tell Congress that
we're done look this is terrible
it makes me mildly nauseous to think
that we might have had some impact on
the election but honestly it wouldn't
change the decision everybody who
disagrees with me has to come back to
October 28th with me and stare at this
and tell me what you would do would you
speak or would you conceal and I could
be wrong but we honestly made a decision
between those two choices that even in
hindsight and this has been one of the
world's most painful experiences
I would make the same decision I would
not conceal that on October 28th from
the Congress and I sent the letter to
Congress by the way people forget this I
didn't make a public announcement
I sent a private letter to the chairs
and the rankings of the oversight
committees did you know it's a
distinction without a difference in the
world of leaks but it is it was very
important that I tell them instead of
concealing and reasonable people can
disagree but that's the reason I made
that choice and it was a hard choice I
still believe in retrospect the right
choice as painful as this has been and
I'm sorry for the long answer well let
me respond on the letter it was just a
matter of minutes before the world knew
about it
secondly my understanding and staff has
just said to me that you didn't get a
search warrant before making the
announcement I think that's right I
think I authorized and the department
justice agreed we were going to seek a
search warrant I actually don't see it
as a meaningful distinction well it very
it's very hard it would have been you
took an enormous gamble the gamble was
that there was something there that
would invalidate her candidacy and there
wasn't so one has to look at that action
and say did it affect the campaign and I
think most people who have looked at
this say yes it did affect the campaign
why would he do it and what was there
any conflict among your staff people
saying do it people saying don't do it
as has been reported no there was a
great debate I have a fabulous staff at
all levels and one of my junior lawyers
said should you consider that what
you're about to do may help elect Donald
Trump president and I said thank you for
raising that not for a moment because
down that path lies the death of the FBI
is an independent institution in America
I can't consider for a second whose
political fortunes will be affected in
what way we have to ask ourselves what
is the right thing to do and then do
that thing I'm very proud of the way we
debated it and at the end of the day
everyone on my team agreed we have to
tell Congress
that we are restarting this in a hugely
significant way well there's a way to do
that I don't know whether it would work
or not but certainly in a classified way
carrying out your tradition of not
announcing investigations and you know I
look at this exactly the opposite way
you do everybody knew it would influence
the investigation before that there was
a very large percentage of chance that
it would
and yet that percentage of chance was
taken and there was no information and
the election was lost so it seems to me
that before your department does
something like this you really ought to
because they can senator leahy began to
talk about other other investigations
and I think this theory does not hold up
when you look at other investigations
but let me go on to 702 because you
began your comments saying how important
it is and yes it is important we've got
a think a problem and the issue that
we're going to need to address is the
FBI's practice of searching 702 data
using us person identifier zazz query
terms and some have called this an
unconstitutional backdoor search while
others say that such queries are
essential to assuring that potential
terrorists don't slip through the cracks
as they did before so could you give us
your views on that and how it might be
handled to avoid the charge which may
bring down 702 No thank you senator it's
a really important issue the way 702
works is under that provision of the
statute the FISA Court federal judges
authorized us as US agencies to collect
the communications of non-us people that
we believe to be overseas if there
using American infrastructure the
criticism the FBI has gotten in the
feedback we've gotten consistently since
9/11 is you have to make sure you're in
a position to connect the dots you can't
have stove-piped information and so
we've responded to that over the last 10
years mostly to the great work of my
predecessor Bob Muller and we have
Confederated databases so that if we
collect information under 702 it doesn't
sit in a separate stovepipe it sits in a
single cloud type environment so that if
I'm hoping an investigation in the
United States in a terrorism matter an
intelligence matter or criminal matter
and I have a name of the suspect and
their telephone number and their email
addresses I search the FBI's databases
that search necessarily will also touch
the information that was collected under
702 so that we don't miss a dot but
nobody gets access to the information
that sits in the 702 database unless
they've been trained correctly if there
is let's imagine that terrorists
overseas were talking about a suspect in
the United States or someone's email
address in the United States was in
touch with that terrorist and that
information sits in the 702 database
when we open the case in the United
States and put in that name and that
email address it will touch that data
and tell us there's information in the
702 database that's relevant if the
agent doing the query is properly
trained on how to handle that
he or she will be able to see that
information if they're not properly
trained
they'll be alerted that there is
information then they have to go get the
appropriate training and the appropriate
oversight to be able to see it but to do
it otherwise is to risk us where it
matters most in the United States
failing to connect dots so my view is
the information that's in the 702
database has been lawfully collected
carefully overseen and checked and our
use of it is also appropriate and
carefully overseen and checked
I'm not sure what that means in this
context what we do is we combine
information collected from any lawful
source in a single FBI database so we
don't miss a dot when we're conducting
investigations in the United States what
we make sure though is nobody gets to
see FISA information of any kind unless
they've had the appropriate training and
have the appropriate oversight my time
is up Thank You senator hatch
well Thank You senator director Comey in
January I introduced the s 139 the rapid
DNA act it's bipartisan co-sponsors
include senators Feinstein corn and
Coons
flake Club a Charlie on this committee
and maybe more mr. Chairman I want to
thank you for putting this bill on the
agenda for tomorrow's business meeting
this is the same bill that the Senate
unanimously passed last year this
technology allows developing a DNA
profile and performing database
comparisons in less than two hours
following standards and procedures
approved by the FBI it would allow law
enforcement to solve crimes and innocent
advocates to absorbs
now mr. director you came before this
committee in December 2015 and asked you
then about this legislation you said it
would quote help us change the world in
a very very exciting way unquote is that
still your view of the value of this
legislation and you believe that
Congress should enact it on its own
without getting tangled up in other
criminal justice reform issues I agree
very much senator hatch the rapid DNA
will materially advance the safety of
the American people so that if a police
officer somewhere in the United States
has in his or her custody someone who is
a rapist before letting them go on some
lesser offense they'll be able to
quickly check a DNA database and get a
hit that will save lives that will
protect all kinds of people from pain
and I think it's a great thing well
thank you your prepared statement
touches on what the FBI is doing to
protect children from predators
personnel and youth serving
organizations such as employees coaches
or volunteers often work with
unsupervised
they're with youth unsupervised that
magnifies the need for thorough
evaluating and betting at the time they
joined such organizations along the
senators Franken and Klobuchar
I introduced the Child Protection
Improvement Act which gives youth
serving organizations greater access to
the nationwide FBI fingerprint
background check system now do you
believe that providing organizations
like the YMCA and the Girl Scouts of
America greater access to FBI
fingerprint background checks is an
important step in keeping child
predators and violent criminals away
from our children I do senator I don't
know enough about the legislation to
react but I think the more information
you can put in the hands of the people
who are vetting people are going to be
near children the better we have an
exciting new feature of the FBI's
fingerprint system called rap back that
once you check someone's identification
check them to see if they have no record
if they later develop one you can be
alerted to it if it happens thereafter
which I think makes a big difference
well thank you
if smoking at length about the so called
going dark program whereby strong
encryption technology hinders the
ability of law enforcement to access
communication and other personal
personal data on smartphones and similar
devices your prepared testimony for
today's hearing addresses this issue as
well now I've expressed significant
concern about proposals that would
require device or software manufacturers
to build a backdoor into their
programming to allow law enforcement to
access encrypted data in the course of
investigations I remain convinced that
such backdoors can be created without
seriously compromising the the security
of encrypted devices I believe this is
an issue where law enforcement and
stakeholders need to work together to
find solutions rather than coming to
Congress with one-size-fits-all
legislative fixes now what are you doing
to engage with stakeholders on this
issue and what kind of progress are you
making if you can tell us Thank You
senator
I think there's good news on that front
we've had very good open and productive
conversations with the private sector
over the last 18 months about this issue
because everybody realizes we care about
the same things we all love privacy we
all care about public safety and none of
at least the people that I hang around
with none of us want backdoors
we don't want access to devices built-in
in some way what we want to work with
the manufacturers on is to figure out
how can we accommodate both interests in
a sensible way how can we optimize the
privacy security features of their
devices and allow court orders to be
complied with we're having some good
conversations I don't know where they're
going to end up frankly I could imagine
a world that ends up with legislation
saying if you're going to make devices
in the United States you figure out how
to comply with court orders or maybe we
don't go there but we are having
productive conversations right now I
think right section 702 of the 5s
Amendments Act is up for reauthorization
this year we now have almost a decade of
experience using this statute so we have
much more to go on than simply
speculation or theory now the
intelligence value of section 702 is
well documented and it has never been
intentionally misused or abused every
federal court including the FISA Court
that has addressed the issue is
concluded that section 702 is lawful
administration's of both parties have
strongly supported it described for us
that targeting and minimization
procedures of section 702 requires and
how each agency's procedures the subject
oversight within the executive branch
thank you senator as I said in my
opening 702 is a critical tool to
protect this country and the way it
works is we are allowed to conduct
surveillance again under the supervision
of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
Court on non-us persons who are outside
the United States if they're using
American infrastructure an email system
in the United States a phone system in
the United States so it doesn't involve
US persons and it doesn't involve
activity in the United States and then
each agency as you said has detailed
procedures for how we will handle this
information that are approved by the
FISA Court and so become court or
that they govern us but not only we
overseen by the FISA Court we're
overseen by our inspectors general and
by Congress checking on our work and
you're exactly correct
there have been no abuses every court
that has looked at this it says this is
appropriate under the Fourth Amendment
this is appropriate under the statute it
was an act passed by a democratically
controlled Congress for a Republican
president then renewed by a
republican-controlled Congress for a
Democratic president and uphold by every
court that's looked at it and and I'm
telling you what the rest of the
intelligence community has said we need
this to protect the country this should
be an easy conversation to have but
often people get confused about the
details and mix it up with other things
so it's our job to make sure we explain
it clearly well thank you my time is up
sundar Leahy turn to you thank you
welcome back to call me you mentioned
you like these annual beings of course
we didn't have an annual meeting last
year it's been I think last year's the
first time in 15 years that the FBI did
not testify before this committee but no
lots happen that last year have is and
noted senator Feinstein noted that
Americans across the country have been
confused and disappointed by your
judgment handling the investigation into
secretary Clinton's emails and number
occasion you chose to comment directly
and extensively on that investigation
you even released internal FBI memos and
interview notes I may have missed this
but my 42 years here I've never seen
anything like that
but you said absolutely nothing
regarding the investigation into the
Trump campaigns connections to Russia's
illegal efforts how collect on Trump
was it appropriate for you to comment on
one investigation repeatedly not say
anything about the other I think so
can I explain senator Barb and I only
have so much time okay I'll be quick
the department I think like treated both
investigations consistently under the
same principles people forget we would
not confirm the existence of the Hillary
Clinton email investigation until three
months after it began even though it
began with a public referral and the
candidate herself talked about it in
October of 2015 we confirmed it existed
and then said not another word not a
peep about all until we were physical
time possible a couple week before the
election and I think there are other
things involved in that election uh I'll
grant that but there's no question that
that had a great effect historians can
debate what kind of an effect it was but
you you did do it
the in October the FBI was investigating
the Trump campaigns connection to Russia
you said letter informing the Senate
House that you're reviewing additional
emails it could be relevant to this but
both of Vesta cases are open but you
still only commented on what I commented
as I explained earlier on October 28th
in a letter that I sent to the chair and
rankings of the oversight committees
that we were taking additional steps in
the Clinton email investigation because
I had testified under oath repeatedly
that we were done that we were finished
there with respect to the Russia
investigation we treated it like we did
with the Clinton investigation we didn't
say a word about it until months into it
and then the only thing we've confirmed
so far about this is same thing with the
Clinton investigation that we are
investigating and I would expect we're
not going to say another peep about it
until we're done and I don't know what
will be said when we're done but that's
the way we handled the Clinton
investigation as well let me ask you
this during your investigation into
Hillary Clinton's emails a number of
circuits like Rudy Giuliani claimed to
have a pipeline to the
yeah he boasted that and I quote
numerous agents talk to him all the time
close quote regarding the investigation
even said they had insinuate he had
advance warning about the emails
described in your October letter former
FBI agent Jim Kallstrom made similar
claims not either they're lying or
there's a serious problem within the
bureau anybody in the FBI during this
2016 campaign have contact with Rudy
Giuliani about about the Clinton
investigation I don't know yet but if I
find out that people were leaking
information about our investigations
whether to reporters or to private
parties there'll be severe consequences
did you know of anything from Jim
Kallstrom same answer I don't know yet
you know anything about from other
former agents I don't know yet but it's
a matter that I'm very very interested
in but you are looking into it correct
and once you found that answer will you
provide it to us I'll provide it to the
committee in some form I don't know
whether I would say it publicly but I'd
find some way to like to let you know
now the reports a number of the senior
officials in the Trump campaign
administration are connected to the
Russian investigation that the Attorney
General was forced to recuse himself how
many members of this committee have
urged the Deputy Attorney General and he
has that authority to appoint a special
counsel to protect the Independence of
the investigation I recall I was here in
December 2003 shortly after you were
confirmed his Deputy Attorney General
then attorney general Ashcroft recused
himself from the investigation into the
Valerie Plame leak you immediately
appointed special counsel I believe your
point Patrick Fitzgerald what led you to
that decision
in that particular investigation my
judgment was that it that the appearance
of fairness and independence required
that it be removed from the political
chain of command within the Department
of Justice because as you'll recall it
seems like a lifetime ago but that also
that involved the conduct of people who
were senior level people in the White
House and my judgment was that even I as
an independent minded person was a
political appointee and so I ought to
give it to a career person like Pat
Fitzgerald what about the situation now
we have a Deputy Attorney General I
voted for his confirmation but shouldn't
he be not the one to be investigating
campaign contacts when his boss the
Attorney General was a central figure in
that campaign that's a judgment he'll
have to make he is as I hoped I was as
Deputy Attorney General a very
independent-minded
career oriented person but it'd be
premature for me to comment on that past
weekend President Trump again said the
hacking a DNC another effort to
influence the election could have been
China could have been a lot of different
groups that contrary to what the
intelligence community has said the
intelligence community with high
confidence concluded it was Russia in
many circumstances it's hard to do
attribution of a hack but sometimes the
intelligence is there we have high
confidence that the North Koreans hacked
Sony we have high confidence that the
Russians did the hacking of the DNC and
the other organizations I have a lot of
other questions which I'll submit but I
owe it before it sounds totally negative
I want to praise the response of the FBI
in South Burlington Vermont we had had
anonymous emails come in threatening
serious action against students in a
high school escalating cyber threats
including detailed death threats
multiple lockdowns and all the FBI work
closely with Champlain colleges Lahey
Center for digital investigation which
you
a couple years ago it was a textbook
example collaboration between state
local and federal authorities and I want
to thank all those turned out to be a
very disturbed young man who was doing
it but you only have to turn on the TV
and see what happens in different parts
of the country how worried we were in
Vermont I just want to thank here at the
I agents for their help thank you for
that senator senator Graham would be
next so we'll go to Senator Cornyn thank
you according to director Comey I'm
disappointed to see that former
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was
in the news yesterday essentially
blaming you and blaming everything other
than herself for her loss on November
the 8th I find it ironic because you're
not the one who made the decision to
handle classified information on a
private email server you're not the one
who decided to have a private meeting
with secretary Clinton's husband in the
middle of the Justice Department's
ongoing investigation into secretary
Clinton's server I use the word
investigation here because according to
a recent piece in The New York Times you
were forbidden from using the word
investigation and we're instead told to
refer to the investigation which it was
as a matter of course it was the former
attorney general Loretta Lynch who up
until that meeting with President
Clinton was the person responsible for
making the decision whether to convene a
grand jury involving the allegations
against Secretary Clinton and it was
former attorney general Loretta Lynch
who apparently forbade you from using
the word investigation indeed the New
York Times story is true a democratic
operative expressed confidence that the
former attorney general would keep that
investigation from going very far I
think you were given an an impossible
choice to make and you did the best you
could in light of the situation that you
were presented with and it strikes me as
somewhat sad for people here and
elsewhere to condemn you for notifying
Congress
shortly before the election that you'd
uncovered even more emails related to
the investigation including classified
emails again because Secretary Clinton
had made the decision to use a private
email server and I think it's important
to remind folks that you are not the one
who decided to do business this way and
keep State Department emails on a
computer of someone suspected of child
pornography again I believe you were
placed in an incredibly difficult
position you did the best you could you
may recall I was one of those who felt
like given the nature of the
investigation and the concerns that a
special counsel should have been
appointed to conduct the investigation
but of course attorney general Lynch and
the Obama administration oppose that
effort so I just wanted to express to
you my my disappointment that this
continued seeking of a reason any reason
other than the flawed campaign and the
candidate herself for Secretary Clinton
losing the presidential election if I
can turn to a couple of other
substantive items here you've mentioned
702 of FISA in the reauthorization and I
believe you've referred to this as the
crown jewels of the FBI and
counterterrorism investigations could
you explain why this provides such a
unique tool and why you regard it as
literally crown jewels of the FBI
Thank You senator the every time I talk
about this publicly I winced a little
bit because I don't want bad people
around the world to focus on this too
much but really bad people around the
world because of the genius of American
innovation use our products and
infrastructure for their emails for
their communications and what 702 allows
us to do is quickly target terrorists
weapons of mass destruction
proliferators spies cyber hackers non
Americans who are using our
infrastructure to communicate to target
them quickly and collect information on
them and it is vital to all parts of the
intelligence community because of its
agility its speed and its effectiveness
and again in an open setting we can't
explain what you already know from
classified briefings about what a
difference this makes but again because
America is the mother of all this
innovation they use a lot of our
equipment a lot of our networks to
communicate with each other if we were
ever required to establish the normal
warrant process for these non Americans
aren't in our country just because the
photons they're using to plan attacks
cross our country's lands we'd be tying
ourselves in knots for reasons that make
no sense at all and the courts have said
are unnecessary under the Fourth
Amendment so this is a tool we talked a
lot last year about the telephony
metadata database I think that's a
useful tool it does not compare in
importance to 702
we can't lose 702 well I agree and it is
a little bit difficult to talk about
things that do involve classified
matters in public but I think the public
needs to know that there are multiple
oversight layers including the FISA
Court congressional oversight internal
oversight within the FBI and
intelligence community that protects
Americans from and under there with
their privacy rights while targeting
terrorists and people who are trying to
kill us I want to talk a minute about
the electronic communication
transactional records something you and
I've discussed before as well the FBI
can use National Security Letters I
believe to get financial information and
telephone numbers now in the conduct of
a terrorist investigation but because of
a typo in the law the FBI has not been
allowed access to Internet metadata in
national security cases to the extent
that that is necessary can you talk to
us about the importance of that
particular fix the electronic
communications transactional records fix
or echo fix thank you so much senator
this seems like a boring deal this makes
a big impact on our work and here's why
in our counterterrorism cases in our
counterintelligence cases we can issue
with all kinds of layers of approval in
the FBI a National Security Letter to
find out the subscriber to a particular
telephone
and to find out what numbers that
telephone number was in contact with not
the content of those communications but
just the connection again because of
what I believe is a typo in the law and
if I'm wrong Congress will tell me that
they intended this the companies that
provide the same services but on the
Internet resist and say we don't have
the statutory authority to serve an NSL
National Security Letter to find out the
subscriber to a particular email handle
or what addresses were in contact with
what addresses although we could do the
same with telephone communications I
don't think Congress intended that
distinction but what it does to us is in
our most important investigations it
requires us if we want to find out the
subscriber to a particular email handle
to go and get an order from a federal
judge in Washington as part of the FISA
Court an incredibly long and difficult
process and I'm worried about that
slowing us down but also worried about
it becoming a disincentive for our
investigators to do it at all because if
you're working a case in in San Antonio
or in Seattle you're moving very very
quickly and if I have to go to get
subscriber information for heaven's
sakes on an email address to a federal
court in Washington I'm probably going
to try and find some other way around it
if that's what Congress wants sure we'll
follow the law I don't think that was
ever intended and so I would hope that
Congress will fix what I believe is a
typo thank you mr. director I have other
questions for the record thank you
are going over to vote now and I'd also
like to have both Democrat and
Republicans notify me if they want a
second round so I can get a inventory of
that senator klobuchar thank you welcome
back director Comey as you are well
aware Russia is actively working to
undermine our democracy and hurt
American businesses at the same time now
more than ever Americans are looking to
Congress for leadership and we must be a
united front and I've appreciated some
of the members of this committee on the
Republican side who have spoken out
about this we must be united as we seek
information from the administration last
month during a hearing at the House
Intelligence Committee you confirm that
the FBI is investigating the Russian
government's efforts to interfere in the
2016 presidential election including any
links between the Trump campaign and the
Russian government I know that you
cannot discuss that ongoing
investigation but just one question to
clarify will you commit to ensuring that
the relevant congressional committees
receive a full and timely briefing on
that investigations findings in general
I can senator I need Department of
Justice approval to brief on particular
people that were investigating we've
briefed the chairs in the rankings
including of this committee on who we
have cases open on and exactly what
we're doing and how we're using various
sources of information I don't know
whether the Department will approve that
for the entire intelligence committees
but I'll lean as far forward as I can
and then because some attorney general
sessions is recused from that and now
rod Rosen Stein is approved you go to
him then to get that approval yes I've
already briefed him at his first day in
office i briefed him on where we are and
so he would be the person to make that
decision thank you in your testimony you
note that the Justice Department brought
charges against Russian spies and
criminal hackers in connection with the
2014 Yahoo cyberattack in February an
example of a cyber attack in our economy
in December of 2016
the FBI and the Department of Homeland
Security released a 13 page report
providing technical details about how
federal investigators linked Russia to
the hacks against u.s. political
organizations does Russia use the same
military and civilian tools it used to
hack our political organizations in
order to do things like hack into US
companies do identities and so the
credit card information of Americans on
the black market and how is the FBI
working to fight against hackers
supported by foreign governments like
Russia the answer is yes both their
government organizations and then they
have a relationship it's often difficult
to define with criminals and that the
Yahoo hacks actually an example of that
you had some of the Russia's greatest
criminal hackers and Intelligence Agency
hackers working together so the answer
is yes and what we're doing is trying to
see if we can impose costs on that
behavior in a lot of different ways but
including one I mentioned in my opening
which is locking up people if we can get
them outside of Russia Russia is not too
great about cooperating with us when
they're criminals inside their borders
but all of them like to travel and so if
they travel grabbing them and and
locking the putting handcuffs on them to
send a message that that's not a freebie
in your testimony you also discuss the
threat that transnational organized
crime poses to our safety and our
security
Russia has vast criminal networks that
the Kremlin uses to sow instability
across the world I heard these concerns
firsthand when senator Graham and McCain
and I were in the Baltics Ukraine and
Georgia there been recent concerns that
organized criminals including Russians
are using the luxury real estate market
to launder money the Treasury Department
has noted a significant rise in the use
of shell companies in real estate
transactions because foreign buyers use
them as a way to hide their identity and
find a safe haven for their money in the
u.s. in fact nearly half of all homes in
the u.s. worth at least 5 million
dollars are purchased using shell
companies does the anonymity associated
with the use of shell companies to buy
real estate hurt the FBI's ability to
trace the flow of lists
money and fight organized crime and do
you support efforts by the Treasury
Department use its existing authority to
require more transparency in these
transactions yes and yes okay very good
because I think this is a huge problem
when you hear that over five million
dollars home half of them purchased by
shell Trent shell companies that is a
major problem in March this committee
Subcommittee on crime and terrorism held
its first hearing I think Senator Graham
and Senator Whitehouse for that I raised
the issue of protecting our election
infrastructure with former Bush
Department of Justice official Ken
Weinstein and he agreed that this is a
very important issue as a ranking as the
ranking member of the Rules Committee
I'm particularly concerned about
ensuring our elections are safe from
foreign interference I recently led a
group of 26 senators and calling for a
full account of the election assistance
Commission efforts to address Russian
cyber security threats in the 2016
election I'm also working on legislation
in this area can you discuss how the FBI
has coordinated with the election
assistance Commission Department of
Homeland Security and state and local
election officials to help protect the
integrity of our election process Thank
You senator in short what we've done
with DHS is share the tools tactics and
techniques we see Packers especially
from the 2016 election season using to
attack voter registration databases and
try and engage in other hacks and we've
pushed that out to all the states and to
the election assistance Commission so
they can harden their networks that's
one of the most important things we can
do is equip them with the information to
make their systems tighter very good
because as you know we have different
equipment all over this country there's
some advantage to that I think I think
it's good when we have paper ballot
backups of course but we have to be
prepared for this and this certainly
isn't about one political party or one
candidate last the last time you came
before the committee in December 2015
just one week after the San Bernardino
attacks since then as was noted by the
chair we've seen other attacks in our
country
we had in a tragedy in a shopping mall
in Saint Cloud Minnesota 10 wounded at a
shopping mall thankfully brave off-duty
cop was there I was able to stop further
damage from being done and I would also
like to thank you and the FBI for your
Investigation having talked to the chief
up there senator Franken and I were
briefed by him as well as congressman
Emmer right after this attack the local
police department is a midsize
department and they had to do a lot with
working with the community that have a
significant Somali community there
that's a big part of their community
that they're proud to have there so
they're working with them they're
working with the community they're
helping but the FBI really stood in and
did the investigation and I guess I want
to thank you for that and just let end
with one question since we've been
reported that Isis has encouraged lone
wolf attacks I like what we saw in
Orlando it's murkier the vaccine st.
cloud what challenges do these type of
attacks present for law enforcement and
what is the FBI doing to prevent these
kinds of tragedies the center Thank You
senator the central challenge is not
just finding needles in a nationwide
haystack but trying to figure out which
pieces of hay might become a needle and
that is which of the troubled young
people or sometimes it's older people
are consuming poisonous propaganda some
Isis some Anwar Awlaki some other
sources and are moving towards thinking
and active violence like a stabbing at a
shopping mall is some way to achieve
meaning in their lives and a huge part
of it is building relationships with the
communities you mentioned because those
folks do not want anyone committing
violence committing violence in the name
of their faith and so they have the same
incentives we do and making sure they
see us that way and we see them that way
is at the heart of our response because
we're not going to see some troubled kid
going sideways and thinking he should
stab people anywhere near as easily as
the people around that kid are going to
see it and so getting in a position
where they feel comfortable telling us
or telling local law enforcement is at
the heart of our ability to define those
needles evaluate those pieces of a and
stop this appreciate it thank you
Thank You director coming could you pass
on to your agents and I'll support
personnel how much we appreciate their
efforts to defend the country we're
going to set a record for questions
asked and answered in 6 minutes and 54
seconds if I can do you agree with me if
sequestration goes back into effect next
year would be devastating to the FBI
yes and it's due to do so unless
Congress changes it that's I've been
told that ok do you agree with me that
ISIL loses the caliphate these people
will go out throughout the world and
become terrorist agents in the threat of
terrorism to the homeland is going to
get greater over time not smaller yes
it'll diminish in that their power to
put out their media to the troubled
people in the country will decrease but
the the hardened killers flowing out of
the caliphate will be a big problem so
from a funding point of view terrorism
is not going to get better is probably
going to get worse I think that's fair
to say did you ever talk to Sally Yates
about her concerns about general Flynn
being compromised I did I don't know
whether I can talk about it in this
forum but yet the answer is yes that she
had concerns about general Flynn and she
expressed those concerns to you correct
okay we'll talk about that later do you
stand by your house testimony of March
20th that there was no surveillance of
the Trump campaign that you're aware of
correct you would know about it if they
were is that correct I think so yes okay
ah Carter Page was there a FISA warrant
issued regarding Carter pages activity
with the Russians I can't answer that
here did you consider a Carter page a
agent of the campaign same answer I
can't answer that here okay uh do you
stand by your testimony that there is an
active investigation counterintelligence
investigation regarding Trump campaign
individuals in the Russian government as
to whether or not they collaborate you
said that in marches and see if there
was any coordination between the Russian
effort right and people is that still
going on yes
okay so nothing's changed you stand by
those two statements right but you won't
tell me about Carter page not here I
won't okay
the chairman mentioned that fusion are
you familiar with fusion I know the name
okay are they part of the Russian
intelligence apparatus I can't say okay
do you agree with me the diffusion was
involved in preparing a dossier against
Donald Trump that would be interfering
in our election by the Russians I I
don't want to say okay do you agree with
me that Anthony Weiner of 2016 should
not have access to classified
information uh yes that's a first would
you agree with me that if that's not
illegal we've got really bad laws well
if he hadn't well he got it somehow
would be illegal if he didn't have
appropriate clearance well do you agree
with me he didn't have appropriate
clearance he if he did have appropriate
clearance I didn't even be worse I don't
believe at the time we found that on his
laptop that he had any kind of I agree
so for him to get it should be a crime
somebody should be prosecuted for let
Anthony Weiner have access to classified
classified information does that make
general sense it could be a crime we
depend upon what to be what do you dream
it should be that anybody that less
Anthony Weiner had classified
information probably should be
prosecuted if our laws don't cover that
they probably should there's no Anthony
Weiner statute but it is there's already
well maybe we need one that's already a
statute all right good already a statue
I just wonder how you can get classified
information and not be a crime about
somebody uh unmasking are you familiar
with that
I'm failure with that term okay has the
bureau ever requested unmasking of an
American citizen caught up in incidental
collection oh yes yeah okay I did it
this week in connection with an
intelligence report all right before I
authorize reauthorize 702 and I'm a
pretty hawkish guy I want to know how
unmasking works are you aware of any
requests by the White House anybody in
the Obama administration to unmask
American citizens that were caught up in
incidental surveillances in 2015 or 2016
I'm not I'm not aware of any request to
the FBI would you know what they would
then make the request
- well they could make it - to anyone in
the FBI who was what about the NSA
wouldn't you make it to the NSA sure if
it was an NSA report okay - I've read in
the media and heard about NSA reports
when you asked for I don't know who do
you ask do you go to the NSA to ask that
somebody be unmasked when I want for
example got a report this week that said
US company number one right it had been
removed and I said I believe I need to
know the name of that company who do you
ask so I asked my intelligence briefing
the PDB staff say I'd like to know that
and then she goes and asked the owner of
the information which would be the NSA
well in this case I think it was CIA
information saying the director is the
owner of the information record requests
for unmasking I believe the NSA does CI
I don't know about CSA NSA definitely
does but there should be a record
somewhere in our government for a
request unmasked regardless of who made
the request I think that's right uh is
it fair to say that very few people can
make requests for unmasking MS I can't
go and make that request as a senator
Kenna
sure it's a fairly small group that the
consumers which I am of that small
sister National Security Council within
that group that can make this request or
do you know I don't know for sure I
think the National Security Advisor
certainly can okay uh when it comes to
Russia is it fair to say that the
government of russia actively provides
safe haven to cyber criminals yes is it
fair to say that the Russian government
is still involved in American politics
yes is it fair to say we need to stop
them from doing this yes fair to say do
you agree with me the only way they're
going to stop is for them to pay a price
for interfering and our political
process I think that's a fair statement
yeah okay so what we're doing today is
not working they're still doing it
they're doing it all of the world aren't
they yes so what kind of threat do you
believe Russia presents to our
democratic process given what you know
about Russia's behavior of late well
certainly in my view the greatest threat
of any nation on earth given their
intention and their capability
do you agree that they did not change
the actual vote tally but one day they
might I agree that I very much we found
no indication of any change in vote
tallies there was efforts aimed at voter
registration systems but I suppose in
theory par in the United States the
beauty of our system is it's a bit of a
hairball and all different kinds of
systems and and you know elders have
they done this in other countries where
they actually tampered with a vote
my understanding is they have attempted
in other countries and there's no reason
they didn't want it tempted here if we
don't stop them over time I think that's
fair thank you Thank You chairman
welcome back director Comey what is the
policy of the Department and the bureau
regarding the release of derogatory
investigative information about an
uncharged subject the general practices
we don't talk about completed
investigations that didn't result in
charges as a general matter and what is
the policy regarding release of
derogatory information about charged
subjects beyond the derogatory
investigative information disclosed
either in the charging document or in
further court proceedings well I think
you summarized it the gist of the policy
is you don't want to anything outside
the charging documents or the public
record that might prejudice the trial
proceeding and one of the reasons you do
that is if you had a police chief say we
have investigated the contract between
the mayor and the contractor and we've
decided there were no misdeeds but we
found out that the mayor was sleeping
with her driver I just want to let you
know that that would be kind of a blow
to the integrity the prosecutor function
and would probably tend to diminish
support for the prosecutor function if
we're played by those rules correct
that's fair that's why the policy exists
yep
with respect to oversight questions
let's hypothesize that an investigation
exists and the public knows about it
which could happen for a great number of
legitimate reasons what questions are
appropriate for senators to ask about
that investigation in their oversight
capacity
they can ask anything they want what
what questions are appropriate for you
to answer
very few wala matter is pending and
while we know it's pending is it
appropriate for you to tell us whether
it's adequately resourced and asked
questions about for instance are there
actually agents assigned to this or is
this been put in somebody's bottom
drawer sure potentially right and how's
it being supervised to is working on it
that sort of thing
and are there benchmarks in certain
types of cases where departmental
approvals are required or the
involvement of certain Department
officials it's required to see whether
those steps have actually been taken I'm
not sure I'm following the question I'm
sorry let's say you've got a
hypothetically a Rico investigation and
has to go through procedures within the
department I'm sorry to allow a Rico
investigation to proceed if none of
those have ever been invoked or
implicated that would send a signal that
maybe not much effort has been dedicated
to it would that be a legitimate
question to ask have these again you'd
have to know that was a Rico
investigation but assuming that we knew
that that was the case with those
staging elements as an investigation
moves forward in the internal department
approvals be appropriate for us to ask
about and unit answer about that's
harder question I'm not sure we'll be
appropriate to answer it because it
would give away what we were looking at
potentially would it be appropriate to
ask if whether any investigate any
witnesses have been interviewed or
whether any documents have been obtained
pursuant to the investigation that's
that's also a harder one I'd be
reluctant to answer questions like that
because it's a slippery slope to giving
away information about exactly what
you're doing but if we're concerned that
investigation gets put on the shelf and
not taken seriously the fact that no
witnesses have been called and no
documents have been sought would be
pretty relevant and wouldn't reveal
anything other than a lack of attention
by the Bureau correct it could but we're
very careful about revealing how we
might use a grand jury for example and
so if we start a few got sick see I
understand that this is a separate thing
yeah so that's a harder call well we'll
pursue it okay
what is the department's or the bureau's
policy regarding witnesses who
are cooperating in investigation who
have some form of ongoing compliance
problem let's say they haven't paid
their taxes for the last year is it the
policy of the department of the borough
that they should get those cooperating
witnesses to clean up their act so that
their non-compliance does not become an
issue later on in the case yes I don't
know whether it's a written I know I
should know this I can't remember
sitting here with as a written policy
it's certainly a law not getting
practice long-standing practice exactly
when our tax returns useful in
investigating a criminal offense well
they're useful in showing unreported
income motive if someone hides something
that should otherwise be on a tax return
indicates they might know it was
criminal activity it's not uncommon to
seek and use tax returns in a criminal
investigation not uncommon it's a very
difficult process as it should be but
especially in complex financial cases
it's a relatively common tool the
hearing that Senator Graham and I held
with respect to Russia's infiltration
and influence in the last election
raised the issue of Russia intervening
with business leaders in a country
engaging them in bribery or other highly
favorable business deals with a view to
either recruiting them as somebody who
has been bribed or being able to
threaten them by disclosing the illicit
relationship they're perfectly happy to
blow up their own cutout but it also
blows up the individual have you seen
any indication that those are Russian
strategies in their election influence
toolbox in general my general my
understanding is those are tools that
the Russians have used over many decades
and lastly the European Union is moving
towards requiring transparency of
incorporations
so that shell corporations are harder to
create that risks leaving the United
States as the last big haven for shell
corporations is it true that shell
corporations are often used as a device
for criminal money-laundering yes is it
true that shell corporations are also
often used as a device for the
concealment of criminally garnered funds
yes and to avoid legitimate taxation yes
what do you think the hazards are for
the United States with respect to
election interference of continuing to
maintain a system in which shell
corporations that you never know who's
really behind them are commonplace
I suppose one risk is that it makes it
easier for illicit money to make its way
into a political environment and that's
not a good thing I don't think it is
yeah me neither
okay thank you very much Thank You
chairman director thank you for being
here
given the FBI's extensive
responsibilities and expertise in cyber
and counterintelligence investigations
how likely do you think it is that
Senate IT systems have been targeted by
foreign intelligence services services I
would estimate it's a certainty in
inside the IC who who would talk about
that problem and who with the Senate
would they inform well they're Beneke I
don't talk about particular matters but
it often is the FBI alerting a US
government institution or private-sector
DHS might come across it or or other
parts of the intelligence community
especially NSA when when we talk about
things like cyber investigations right
now so often on cable TV it becomes the
shirts and skins exercise so without
asking you to comment about anything
that's retrospective about 2016 do you
think it's likely that in 2018 and
Beyond you're going to see more
targeting of US public discourse and
elections I do I think one of the
lessons that did Lee the Russians may
have drawn from this is that this works
and so as I said last a month or so ago
I expect to see them back in 2018
especially in 2020 you regularly testify
and correct
maiya 5 mr. misheard you but I think
you've regularly testified that you
don't think the bureau is short of
resources you don't come before us and
make big increased appropriations
requests and yet those of us were very
concerned about cyber look at the US
government writ large and think we're
not at all prepared for the future can
you tell us what the FBI is doing to
prepare for that 2018 and 2020
circumstance that you envision without
given too much detail we have a enormous
part of the FBI in our
counterintelligence division and in our
cyber division that focuses on just that
threat and making sure that we do
everything we can to understand how the
bad guys might come at us and as I
talked about earlier to equip the
civilian agencies they're responsible
for hardening our infrastructure with
all the information we have about how
they're going to come at us and if you
had in your national security domain
increased resources how would you spend
another marginal dollar beyond what you
expect to receive now I probably have a
tie between investing more in upgrading
our systems to make sure we're keeping
pace with the bar of excellence and
probably to hire additional cyber agents
and analysts and if you had your
druthers what kind of increased funding
request would you make I wouldn't make
any sitting here I'd like to talk a
little bit about WikiLeaks in January
the FBI contributed to an IC assessment
that concluded that WikiLeaks is a known
outlet of foreign propaganda do you
stand by that assessment yes do you
believe that WikiLeaks has released
sensitive and classified information yes
do you believe any of WikiLeaks
disclosures have endangered American
lives and/or put at risk American
interests I believe both have been the
result of some of their releases can you
help me understand why Julian Assange
has not been charged for the crime well
I don't want to comment on the
particular case because I don't want to
confirm whether or not there are charges
pending
he hasn't been apprehended because he's
inside the Ecuadorian Embassy in London
I sent a letter to the Attorney General
a number of weeks ago asking questions
about the status of the investigation
and it seemed pretty clear though
individuals were polite and kind and
response
to our request it seemed that across the
IC there wasn't much deliberation about
WikiLeaks and about join Assange and
this question is the FBI participating
in any interagency dialogue about
whether or not Assange has committed
crimes I don't know where you got that
impression but WikiLeaks is a important
focus of our attention I intentionally
left the almost half of my time for you
to sort of wax broadly for a minute
there is room for reasonable people to
disagree about at what point an
allegedly journalistic organization
crosses a line to become some sort of a
tool of foreign intelligence there are
Americans well-meaning thoughtful people
who think that weak elites might just be
a journalistic outfit can you explain
why that is not your view yeah and again
I want to be careful they don't
prejudice any future proceeding it's a
important question because all of us
care deeply about the First Amendment
and the ability of a Free Press to get
information about our work and publish
it to my mind it crosses a line when it
moves from being about trying to educate
a public instead just becomes about
intelligence porn frankly just pushing
out information about sources and
methods without regard to interest
without regard to the First Amendment
values that normally underlie press
reporting and simply becomes a conduit
for the Russian intelligence services or
some other adversary the United States
just to push out information to damage
the United States and I realize
reasonable people as you said struggle
to draw a line but surely there's
conduct that's so far to the side of
that line that we can all agree there's
nothing that even smells journalists
about some of this conduct so if you
could map that continuum there are
clearly members of the IC that have at
different points in the past leaked
classified information that is an
illegal act correct correct when
American journalists court and solicit
that information have they violated any
law by asking people in the IC to
potentially leak to leaked information
that is potentially classified that
conduct is not treated
by the US government as criminal conduct
I've been asked in other contexts isn't
it true that the Espionage statute has
no carve-out for journalists that's true
but at least in my lifetime the
Department of Justice's view has been
news gathering and legitimate news
reporting is not covered is not going to
be investigated or prosecuted as a
criminal act that's how it's thought of
so a an investigative reporter taking
advantage of and celebrating the
liberties that we have under the First
Amendment at the Washington Post or at
the Omaha world-herald or at the Lincoln
Journal star at the New York Times
trying to talk to people in the IC and
get the maximum amount of information
that they possibly can out of them to
inform the public it is not the burden
of an American journalist to discern
whether or not the number of the IC is
leaking information that might be
classified the journalist can
legitimately seek information and it's
not their job to police it the number of
the US I see that leaks classified
information has broken a law right but I
think the clear legal obligation rests
on those people who are in the
government in possession of intelligence
classified information it's not the
journalists burden okay our focus is and
should be on the leakers not those that
are obtaining it as part of legitimate
news gathering so near this part one
more time and I know that the chairman
has indulged me I'm at and pastime but
the American journalist who's seeking
this information differs from Assange
and WikiLeaks how in that there's at
least a portion and people can argue
that maybe this conduct wikileaks is
engaged in in the past that's closer to
regular news gathering but in my view a
huge portion of WikiLeaks is activities
has nothing to do with legitimate news
gathering and forming the public
commenting on important public
controversies but it's simply about
releasing classified information to
damage the United States of America and
and people sometimes get cynical about
journalists American journalists do not
do
[Music]
Oh
you
Trump from I know I'm hitting my time
but let me ask one one question for
Thank You mr. chairman from an
investigative standpoint is the sheer
number of connections unusual or
significant what about each individual's
proximity to the president is an unusual
for individuals in these important roles
they have so many unexpected and often
undisclosed ties to a foreign power not
to give you the same answer that's not
something I can come in on okay thank
you mr. Jenner Thank You mr. chairman
and thank you director Comey with regard
to 702 reauthorization last well that
the in 2014 the privacy and civil
liberties oversight board recommended
that agencies develop mechanisms to
limit the potential scope of incidental
collection under your leadership what is
the bureau done to comply with these
recommendations what we've done is make
sure that we have tightened up our
training and our and making sure that
nobody with unauthorized access gets to
see the content of a 702 collection
that's probably a ugly way of
summarizing it is a lot more beneath
that but that's the gist of it just to
make sure we're still collected under
under 702 just to make sure that nobody
gets access to it doesn't have a
need-to-know and hasn't been trained on
how to handle FISA information can you
briefly describe the process for
incidental collection or minimizing
those who are involved yeah incidental
collection is the name given to if
you're targeting a terrorist let's say
who's in Yemen and he happens to be
using an American email provider to
communicate so under 702 the US
intelligence community can collect that
terrorist communications he's outside
the United States and he's not an
American
if an American contacts that terrorist
sends him an email at his let's imagine
it's a gmail account his Gmail that will
be incidentally collected that Amer
Rickon who sent the email to the
terrorists is not the target but because
he or she communicated with the
terrorists that is collected as part of
that lawful collection that's what
incidental collection means and if the
FBI is doing that 702 collection those
communications from the terrorists and
to the terrorists would sit in our
database if we open an investigation on
that person who happen to be the
communicant and we search our systems we
will hit on that 702 collection and the
investigating agent will know holy cow
there's an American who was in touch
with that terrorists in Yemen if that
agent has been trained that has access
to the information they'll be able to
know it that's how our systems are
designed thank you I should say the same
review that was conducted in 2014 does
point out the value of the program I
certainly think and I think most of us
do here see the incredible value 702 and
need for reauthorization there with
regard to just different topic
completely polygraph testing as you're
aware any applicant for a law
enforcement position with the federal
government is required to undergo a
polygraph it's worth noting that CPB
experiences significantly high higher
failure rates around 65% and and than
any other federal law enforcement agency
the FBI does pretty well with this has
the Bureau ever conducted any
benchmarking with other federal agencies
as to the process where you require a
polygraph or for employment it seems
that I mean given FBI success with this
instrument that you could inform some of
the other agencies who are having
difficulties I don't know whether we
have senator Bell find out I think we
have with other members of the
intelligence community but I don't know
whether we've talked to CBP about our
program it would be helpful with regard
to CPP if you could look into that we
appreciate it
with regard to data breaches falling on
what Senator SAS was asking given the
amount of sensitive data held by the FBI
what are you doing to protect your own
systems a whole lot they don't want to
about too much in openstep but it is a
constant weary of all of us under since
I've been director we've stood up
something called the insider threat
Center and I've put a senior executive
FBI executive in charge of it because I
want someone waking up every morning
worrying about how might we lose data
who might be penetrating us either our
systems or as a human asset and so a ton
of work is going into protecting our
systems but the weakest link is always
the people because you can have the
greatest firewalls and the greatest
intrusion detection system but if your
people are engaging either negligent or
intentional misconduct all of that's
defeated so we're spending a lot of time
trying to make sure we have a rich
picture of our people that is constant
and doesn't depend upon five-year
polygraph reinvestigations but that
shows us flags of a troubled employee in
real-time that's hard to do and build
technically and as a matter of law and
policy but we're working very hard on it
in your opinion is Congress doing enough
to protect itself and our systems from
outside outside threats I don't mean
this is a wise guy answer surely not
because none of us can be doing enough
frankly again it's not just about the
perimeter we build it's about the
security culture inside our
organizations and and look I'm part of
the FBI and I still don't think ours is
good enough
I'm sure Congress this is not good
enough you know the Freedom of
Information Act allows access citizens
have the right to get information from
the federal government can you talk
about how the bureau promptly and fully
responds to FOIA requests at the same
time you level or up maintain some level
of security over sensitive and
classified data we have an enormous FOIA
operation as you might imagine that's
working I think 24 hours a day outside
of Washington DC great people who this
is their life they know the regulations
they know the security sensitivities and
work as hard as we can to comply with
the FOIA deadlines it is it's a huge
pain but it's an essential part of being
a public institution Thank You mr.
chairman
Thank You chairman Grassley Thank You
director Comey for your service and for
your return in front of the Senate
Judiciary Committee I want to start by
asking about a letter and mr. chairman
I'll submit this for the record if I
might I'm Senator Whitehouse and I in
early of August last year sent a letter
to our colleague senator Cruz who then
served as the oversight subcommittee
chairman expressing our grave concern
about the potential for foreign
interference in our upcoming
presidential election we asked for an
oversight hearing to consider whether
existing federal criminal statutes and
court jurisdiction were sufficient to
address conduct related to foreign
entities posing a threat to our election
we didn't have that hearing but I'd like
to ask you that same question now our
existing federal criminal statutes
sufficient to prosecute conduct related
to foreign entities that seek to
undermine or elections I think so is my
answer but someone smarter than I may
have spotted something where there's a
gap but my reaction is we have the
statutory tools it's a question of
gathering the evidence and then applying
it under those statutory tools well in
response to questions from Senator sass
and Senator Graham earlier you stated
that you fully expect Russia to continue
to be engaged in efforts to influence
our elections and you expect them to be
back in 2018 and in 2020 what more
should we be doing both to defend our
election infrastructure and our future
elections against continuing Russian
interference and what more are you doing
was the agency doing to help our allies
in countries like France and Germany
that have upcoming elections where
there's every reason to believe the
Russians are actively interfering there
as well thank you senator
I think two things we can do and that we
are doing both in the United States and
with our allies is telling the people
responsible for protecting the election
infrastructure in the United States
everything we know about how the
Russians and others try to attack those
systems how they might come at it what
IP addresses they might use what what
phishing techniques they might use and
then we've shared the same thing with
our allies that one-two-two equip the
American people and our allies to
understand that this is going on because
a big part of what the Russian
did was pushing out false information
echoing it with these troll farms that
they use and I think one of the most
important things we can do is tell the
American voter this is going on you
should be skeptical you should ask
questions you should understand the
nature of the news that you're getting
and we've done to deliver that same
message to our European colleagues and
an interesting thing is happening the
marketplace of ideas is responding to
this because it's not a role for
government people are out there using
the power of social media to push back
against this kind of thing in France in
the Netherlands in Germany and I hope it
will happen here in the United States
where ordinary citizens will see this
bogus stuff going on and push back kind
of have good troll armies pushing back
the other way
so the marketplace of information is
better educated frankly well it's an
optimistic vision and I appreciate it I
also appreciate the work the FBI
continues to do to push back and to
strengthen our defenses but I think
there's more to do you certainly as
you've testified before made a great
deal of news just before our own
election and I'm struck that you chose
to make public statements about one
investigation and not another the
investigation we now know that was
ongoing into the Trump campaign and the
investigation ongoing into Secretary
Clinton I'm concerned about what the
future practice will be how has the
approach taken with regard to the
Clinton investigation been memorialized
and have you modified in any way FBI or
Department procedures regarding
disclosure of information concerning
investigations particularly close to an
election we have not and the reason for
that is everything that we did that I
did was in my view consistent with
existing Department of Justice policy
that is we don't confirm the existence
of investigations except in unusual
circumstances we don't talk about closed
we don't talk about investigations that
don't result in criminal charges unless
there is a compelling public interest
and so those principles should still
govern we also whenever humanly possible
avoid any action that might have an
impact on an election I still believe
that to be true an incredibly important
guiding principle it's one that I
labored under here frankly as I said
earlier didn't think I had a choice
because I could only have two
actions before me I couldn't find a door
labeled no action
so those principles still exist they're
incredibly important the current
investigation with respect to Russia
we've confirmed it Department Justice
authorized me to confirm that it exists
we're not going to say another word
about it until we're done then I hope in
league with the department justice we'll
figure out if it doesn't result in
charges what if anything will we say
about it and we'll be guided by the same
principles well director I do think
there was a third door
available to you in in late last year
just before the election and that was to
confirm the existence of an ongoing
investigation about the Trump campaign
which I think was of compelling interest
and was an unusual circumstance and
activity by a known adversary to
interfere in our election had there been
public notice that there was a renewed
investigation into both campaigns I
think the impact would have been
different would you agree no I thought a
lot about this and my judgment was a
counterintelligence that we have to
separate two things I thought it was
very important to call out what the
Russians were trying to do with our
election and I offered in August myself
to be a voice for that in a public peace
calling it out the Obama administration
didn't take advantage of that in August
they did it in October but I thought
that was very important to call out
that's a separate question from do you
confirm the existence of a classified
investigation that has just started to
try and figure out are there any
connections between that Russian
activity and US persons that started in
late July remember the Hillary Clinton
investigation we didn't confirm it
existed until three months after it
started and it started publicly so I
thought the consistent principle would
be we don't confirm the existence of
certainly any investigation that
involves the u.s. person but a
classified investigation in its early
stages we don't know what we have what
is there and so I my judgment was
consistent with the principles I've
always operated under that was the right
thing to do separately I thought it was
very important to call out and tell the
American people the Russians are trying
to mess with your elections well I hope
that in the future that attempt to draw
attention to Russian interference or an
election which you've testified you
expect to continue will be effective let
me ask one last question if I might
there's a lot of ways
the FBI helps state and local law
enforcement 1 I've been grateful for was
the violence reduction network through
which the FBI provided much-needed
assistance to wilmington police
departments my home town where we've had
a dramatic spike in violence I'd be
interested in hearing how you imagine or
how you intend that the FBI will
continue to assist local law enforcement
in combating unprecedented spikes in
violent crime in a few of our
communities such as Wellington where
they've happened we're try thank you for
that senator the vrn the violence
reduction network was piloted in
wilmington and a small number of other
places and we believe it works where the
FBI brings to a fight that's primarily a
state and local fight our technology our
intelligence expertise at figuring out
how to connect dots and which of the bad
guys we should focus on and then our
enforcement our agents and their ability
to make cases and so we're trying to do
what we've done in Wilmington in cities
around the country those cities that are
seeing spikes and violence and and the
depressing fact is about half of
America's biggest cities saw another
rise in violence the first quarter of
this year and so we're trying to lean
forward and do what we've done in
Wilmington in those places as well we
appreciate your efforts to support local
law enforcement Thank You director
senator Kennedy morning mr. director
in this afternoon now assume for a
second that I'm not a United States
Senator and that I don't have security
clearance to look at classified
information if someone sends me
classified information and I know or
should know it's classified information
and I read it have I committed a crime
potentially has the person who sent me
the information committed a crime
potentially if they knew you didn't have
a proprietary ensea need to know was
there classified information on former
congressman weiners computer yes who
sent it to him his then spouse Huma
Abedin appears to have had a regular
practice of forwarding emails to him for
him I think to print out for her so she
could then deliver them to the Secretary
of State did Congress former congressman
Weiner read
the classified material I don't I don't
think so
I think is descriptive I don't think
we've been able to interview him because
he has pending criminal problems of
other sorts but my understanding is that
his role would be to print them out as a
matter of convenience if he did read
them would he have committed a crime
potentially would his spouse have
committed a crime again potentially
would depend upon number of things is
there an investigation with respect to
the two of them there was it is we
completed it
why did you conclude neither of them
committed a crime because with respect
to miss Abbott in a particular week we
didn't have any indication that she had
a sense that what she was doing was in
violation of the law couldn't prove any
sort of criminal intent really the
central problem we have with the whole
email investigation was proving that
people knew the secretary and others
knew that they were doing some that they
were communicating about classified
information in a way that they shouldn't
be and proving that they had some sense
that they were doing something unlawful
that was our burden and we weren't able
to meet it so she thought it was okay to
send her husband the information well I
think I don't we get too much into what
she thought we could not prove that the
people sending the information either in
that case or in the other case with the
secretary we're acting with any kind of
mens rea with any kind of criminal
intent assume for a second again I'm not
a United States Senator I'm working for
a presidential campaign and I'm
contacted by a Russian agent and he just
wants to talk about the campaign in
general and strategy am i committing a
crime it harder to answer one I want to
be I probably don't want to answer in
the in even a hypothetical given the
work that we're doing all right let me
try it this way let's assume that I'm
not a United States Senator I'm working
for a presidential campaign
and I'm contacted by a Russian agent who
says I've got some hacked emails here
and I want to visit with you about am i
committing a crime yeah also um senator
I think I should resist answering that
hypothetical okay can you explain to me
not the law but just in your personal
opinion when interrogation techniques
become torture would you mean not the
law right there is a statute that
designs torture in the United States and
so that as a lawyer and as a member of
law enforcement organization that's
where I would start that the definition
of torture is laid out in American
statutes I'm not sure I understand what
you mean beyond that I'm just asking
your personal opinion about what you
think constitutes torture well you would
where you personally will draw the line
drawing on your substantial experience
I'd say in general any conduct that
involves the intentional infliction of
physical pain or discomfort in order to
obtain information is in a colloquial
sense torture may not be torture under
the statute which Congress chose to
define at a fairly high level but as a
human being and a FBI director I
considered the infliction of physical
pain and discomfort to be by large
colloquially torture any kind of
physical pain or discomfort suppose you
just serve someone bad food well again
tricky for us because the FBI is very
careful never to inflict intentionally
inflict physical pain or discomfort of
any sort to try and question somebody so
stamp I'd say yeah that's conduct you
should stay way clear of mr. director
he's also ineffective frankly but that's
a whole nother deal sure
do you think it is possible from a law
enforcement perspective to to properly
vet a non-american non citizen I should
say coming to the United States from a
conflict area such as Syria it's
difficult to do it perfectly and I have
concerns about the ability to vet people
coming from areas where we have no
relationship on the ground with the
government there and so I suppose it's
possible to do it reasonably there's a
number of tools you could bring to bear
but there are always risks associated
with that I mean how do you do it you
can't call you can't call the Chamber of
Commerce in Syria how do you do it well
you and we do it now we query the
holdings of the entire American
intelligence community to see if any
what we call selectors phone numbers
emails addresses associated with that
person have ever shown up anywhere in
the world in our holdings that's a
pretty good way to do it getting into
the person's social media to see what
they have there yes is another pretty
good way to do it the way we rely on in
most cases is the host government will
have information about them yeah and I
mean we're the host government would
come out in the article here go ahead
yeah and in Iraq we had a United States
military presence for many years and
collected a whole lot of biometrics so
we can query that to see if the person's
fingerprints ever showed up copy from
one yeah I got Tim sure I'm sorry how
about Yemen similarly difficult I yield
back my 30 seconds mr. chairman Thank
You senator Hirono thank you you've been
getting a lot of questions surrounding
your decision to to make certain
statements about the investigation into
secretary Clinton's emails and too many
of us you treated the investigation of
the Clinton email investigation or
matter whatever you want to call it
differently than how you treat it the
ongoing investigation
of the Trump campaign and the Russian
attempts to interfere with their
elections and while you've if I can
understand correctly that there's a
you've fell free to speak about the
clinton investigation because it had
been completed when you had your press
conference in july correct 2016 and you
do confirm that that there is still an
ongoing investigation of the Trump
campaign and their conduct with regard
to the to Russian efforts to undermine
our elections we're conducting an
investigation to understand whether
there was any coordination between what
the Russian efforts and anybody
associated with the Trump campaign so
since that you've already confirmed that
such an investigation is ongoing can you
tell us more about what constitutes that
investigation no in July of 2016 when
you announced that you are not going to
be bringing criminal charges against
Secretary Clinton because you did need
to show intent and there was no intent
discovered you held that you spoke for
15 minutes and not only did you say that
you are not going to bring criminal
charges against her by the way which you
said at the end of your 15 minutes but
you went on to chastise her saying that
she had been extremely careless you
raised questions about her judgment you
contradicted statements she had made
about her email practices and said that
possibly that of hostile foreign agents
or governments had gained access to her
server and that had she still been
employed by the government she could
have faced disciplinary action for what
she did I just wanted to you know
whether when you made all those public
public statements chastising her which
amounts to editorializing on your
decision not to bring about criminal
charges it had to occur to you that this
public chastisement put a Secretary
Clinton in a negative light
so did you consider whether this public
chastisement might affect her campaign I
have to respectfully disagree with your
characterization
my intention is chastising or
editorializing my goal was to say what
is true what did we do what did we find
what do we think about it and I tried to
be as complete and fair as I could be
and tell the truth about what we found
and what we think about it and what
we're recommending so when you said that
she was behaving in and extremely what
was it extremely careless
can you psyche me to other examples
where you may sum those kinds of
comments that elaborated on an FBI's
decision not to bring about criminal
charges
I can't as director I know the
department has in the IRS email
investigation they wrote a report after
they were done chastising Lois Lerner I
think the woman's name was for her
behavior in a similar way and so it
happens it's very unusual but it happens
but we know that you were very concerned
about what might happen if it came to
light that you had possibly gone easy on
mrs. Clinton and therefore that you were
concerned about the political
ramifications of your decisions and yet
I was not so you did not consider that
your statements about a person who is
running for president would not have a
negative effect on her I tried very hard
not to consider what effect it might
have politically I tried very hard to
credibly complete an investigation that
had got an extraordinary public
attention and my judgment and people can
disagree about this was that offering as
much transparency as possible but what
we did what we found in what we think of
it was the best way to credibly complete
the investigation I wasn't thinking
about what effect it might have on a
political campaign I find that very hard
to to really you know I find that hard
to believe that you did not contemplate
that there would be political
ramifications to your comments I'm just
wondering why the ramifications
I just tried not to care about them I
knew there'd be a huge storm that would
come but I tried to say what is the
right thing to do in this case yes sir
what the right thing would have been
that you did
have enough evidence to bring about
criminal charges and that should have
been the end of it I would think I don't
understand why you chose to go forward
with all kinds of characterizations
about her actions I that I find hard to
believe and that you will not have
considered the political ramifications
of that it did not you may not have
considered it but the thought should
have occurred to you and that I would
think that you would have bent over
backwards not to say anything that would
have an impact on the campaign or on the
election because you seem to do that
that that was a concern for you let me
turn to the Trump administration's
vetting and security clearances in that
process in recent days there have been
numerous reports of trouble
administration officials failing to
disclose foreign contacts in their
security clearance forms what is the
role of the FBI in vetting the security
clearances of White House personnel if
any sometimes the FBI is assigned to do
the background checks on people who are
coming into government in the executive
office of the president other times not
a lot of times there are people who are
arriving with clearances that already
exist so in the case of the Trump
administration officials and there have
been a number of them was the FBI asked
to participate in the vetting process
the FBI has done background checks for
some appointees in the Trump
administration can you disclose who
these sub pointees were or are I can't
I'm not comfortable sitting right here I
don't know them for sure but I shouldn't
talk about individuals in an open forum
at least without thinking about it
better what would be the consequences
for a White House staffer or Prasanna
who fails to disclose their foreign
contacts on a security clearance form
hard to say it could include losing your
clearances if conduct is intentional it
could subject someone to criminal
liability is that something that the
Department of Justice would investigate
and pursue potentially it I think it
would depend upon who owned the
clearance as well in the first instance
it might be another part of the
intelligence community so since there
have been these concerns raised about
the clearances not being appropriately
vetted is there an ongoing FBI
investigation
nation into what happened with the
vetting process and whether any crimes
may have been committed it's not
something I can comment on sitting here
thank you
Thank You mr. chairman director Comey
welcome thank you for your service thank
you for your testimony um you know I
have to say I found your answer to
Senator Kennedy a few minutes ago
puzzling in that you described the
reason why the case was closed against
miss Aberdeen as that you could not
determine she was aware her conduct was
unlawful and the reason that answer is
puzzling is you're a very accomplished
lawyer and as you're well aware every
first-year law student learns in
criminal law that ignorance of the law
is no excuse and that mens rea a' does
not require knowledge that conduct is
unlawful and in fact the governing
statutes 18 USC 793 F and 18 USC 798 F
798 a have no requirement of a knowledge
of unlawful sit 798 a provides whoever
knowingly and willfully communicates
furnishes transmits or otherwise makes
available to an on an off an
unauthorized person classified
information shall be fined under this
title or in prison not more than 10
years or both under the terms of that
statute the fact pattern you described
in this hearing seems to fit that
statute directly in that if I understand
you correctly you said miss Aberdeen
forwarded hundreds or thousands of
classified emails to her husband on a
non-government non-classified compute
computer how is
how does that conduct not directly
violate that statute first senator if
I'd said that I misspoke she forwarded
hundreds and thousands of emails some of
which contained classified information
in the four generations generations
think is a fair way to say it the
Department of Justice has understood
that statute to require in practice and
I believe they think in law to require a
general sense of criminal intent that is
not a specific intent but a general
criminal intent a sense and knowledge
that what you're doing is unlawful not
filing a particular statute but some
general criminal mens rea oh I can't
find a case that's been brought in the
last 50 years based on negligence based
on without some showing or indicia of
intent you and I have both worked in a
number of jobs that require dealing with
classified information and on its face
anyone dealing with classified
information should know that that
conduct is impermissible let me ask you
how would you handle an FBI agent who
forwarded thousands of classified emails
to his or her spouse on a non-government
computer whether it be significant
administrative discipline I'm highly
confident they wouldn't be prosecuted
I'm also highly confident there would be
discipline all right let's let ship
shift to another topic the previous
Congress I chaired a hearing on on the
willful blindness of the Obama
administration to radical Islamic
terrorism we heard testimony from a
whistleblower at the Department of
Homeland Security that described a purge
DHS had had undergone of editing or
deleting over 800 records at DHS to
remove references to radical Islam to
the Muslim Brotherhood and and the purge
indeed was the word used by the White
House that directed DHS to conduct that
purge we obviously have a new
administration now a new White House a
new Attorney General has the approach of
the FBI to radical Islamic terrorism
changed
any respect with the new administration
not that I'm aware of no let me ask you
about one specific terror attack which
is on May 15th on on may in May of 2015
the terrorist attack in Garland Texas
where two terrorists opened fire on a
peaceful gathering and thankfully no
innocent people were killed thanks to
the heroic action of Garland police
officer Greg Stevens who fatally shot
the two terrorists but a security
officer was shot in the leg and it could
have been much much worse at the time of
the incident you stated publicly that
the FBI did not know that the terrorists
were on their way to the event and that
or that they planned on attacking the
event recently there have been media
reports suggesting otherwise
specifically media reports that have
stated that an undercover FBI agent was
in close communication with the two
terrorists in the weeks leading up to
the attack explicitly discussed plans
for the attack uh and was in a car
directly behind the two terrorists
outside the event and took photos of the
terrorists moments before the attack but
then left the scene when the shooting
began and that that agent was detained
by the garland police uh are those media
reports correct no I stand by what I
said originally I can't go into the
details of it here because they're
classified but the big affair thing is
says the media reports are highly
misleading and in a classified setting I
could explain to you how I would
appreciate you or your designee sharing
those in a classified setting so that I
can learn more of what what occurred
this committee has had substantial focus
also on the practice of the previous IRS
of targeting citizens and citizen groups
based on their political speech
political views and perceived political
opposition to President Obama and the
previous Department of Justice both
Attorneys General Holder and Lynch in my
views stonewalled that investigation is
the FBI currently investigating the
FBI's rather the IRS is unlawful
targeting of citizens for exercising
political speech I think you're
referring to the original investigation
focusing on particular groups allegedly
associated with Tea Party yes we
completed that investigation in the
department declined prosecution we work
very hard on it but a lot of people on
it couldn't make what we thought was a
case and to my knowledge it has not been
reopened so did the FBI recommend
prosecution you said he couldn't make
the case now we couldn't prove again the
challenges of intent we couldn't prove
that anybody was targeting these folks
because they were conservatives or
associated with the Tea Party we worked
very hard to see if we could make that
case we couldn't get there thank you
senator Blumenthal Thanks Thank You mr.
chairman
thank you director Comey for being here
and thank you to you and the men and
women who work with you at the FBI for
their extraordinary service to our
country
much of it unappreciated as you marked
so powerfully it in your opening
statement you have confirmed I believe
that the FBI is investigating potential
ties between Trump associates and the
Russian interference in the 2016
campaign correct yes and you have not to
my knowledge ruled out anyone in the
Trump campaign as potentially a target
of that Criminal Investigation correct
well I haven't said anything publicly
about who we've opened investigations on
briefed the chair and ranking on who
those people are and so I can't I can't
go beyond that in this setting have you
ruled out anyone in the campaign that
you can disclose I don't feel
comfortable answering that senator
because I think it puts me on a slope to
talking about who we're investigating
and if you have you ruled out the
present United States I don't I don't
want people to over interpret this
answer I'm not going to comment on
anyone in particular because that puts
me down a slope of because if I say no
to that then I have to answer succeding
questions so what we've done is briefed
the chair and ranking on who the US
persons are that we've opened
investigations on and that so that's as
far as we're going to go at this point
but as a former prosecutor you know that
when there's an investigation into
several potentially culpable individuals
the evidence from those individuals and
the investigation can lead to others
correct correct
we're always open-minded about and we
follow the evidence wherever it takes it
so potentially the president United
States could be a target of your ongoing
investigation into the Trump campaigns
involvement with Russian interference in
our election correct I just worry I
don't want to answer that correct that
seems to be unfair speculation we will
follow the evidence we'll try and find
as much as we can we'll follow the
evidence wherever it leads
wouldn't this situation be ideal for the
appointment of a special prosecutor and
independent counsel in light of the fact
that the Attorney General has recused
himself and so far as your answers
indicate today no one has been ruled out
publicly in your ongoing investigation I
understand the reasons that you want to
avoid ruling out anyone publicly but for
exactly that reason because of the
appearance of a potential conflict of
interest
isn't this situation absolutely crying
out for a special prosecutor that's a
judgment for the Deputy Attorney General
the acting Attorney General on this
matter and not something I should
comment on you had some experience in
this kind of decision 2003 you admirably
appointed a special prosecutor Patrick
Fitzgerald when the Attorney General
then John Ashcroft refused recused
himself from involvement in the
investigation concerning whether the
Bush administration officials illegally
disclose the identity of an undercover
CIA official are there any differences
materially between that situation and
this one so far as the reasons to
appoint a special counsel well I think
both situations as with all
investigations that touch on people
who've been actors in a political world
involve considerations of actual
conflict of interest and appearance of
conflict of interests in I'm not going
to talk about the current situation in
that situation my judgment was that the
credibility of the investigation into
the leak of the CIA officers identity
would be best served by not having an
overseen by myself because I was a
political appointee and appointing
someone and giving him the authority to
run it separate from the political
leadership of the Department of Justice
that was my judgment in that
circumstance I don't know what judgment
the acting Attorney General will make
I'm sure he'll consider many of the same
things as he asked for your advice I'm
not I'm not going to say senator I
wouldn't when I was Dagon I want people
talking about what their conversations
with me so I'll do the same for him so
far as the investigation the ongoing
investigation into Trump associates and
their potential collusion with the
Russian meddling in our election
will you be providing any updates to the
American people certainly not before the
matter is concluded and then depending
upon how the matter is concluded I mean
some matters are concluded with criminal
charges and then there's a public
accounting in a charging document other
matters as was the case with the email
investigation and with no charges but
some statement of some sort others end
with no statement I don't know yet and
obviously I'd want to do that in close
coordination with the department will
you make recommendations to presumably
it would be the Deputy Attorney General
or the special prosecutor if one is
appointed as to whether criminal charges
should be brought I don't know in this
case in particular but in general we
almost always do especially the highest
profile matters but you cannot yourself
pursue criminal charges correct correct
I think that's important for the
American people understand because it
bears on the question of whether a
special prosecutor ought to be appointed
the FBI may inspire great credibility
and Trust but the FBI cannot bring
charges neither can the intelligence
committees do so nor can an independent
commission only the Deputy Attorney
General or a special prosecutor
designated by him correct correct let me
close because I am running out of time
have you been questioned at all by the
Inspector General in connection with the
inquiry that I understand is on going
into a number of the topics that we've
been discussing here yes I've been
interviewed the Inspector General's
inspecting me and looking at my conduct
in the course of the email investigation
which I know this sounds like a crazy
thing to say I encourage I want that
inspection because I want that my I want
my story told because some of its
classified but also if I did something
wrong I want to hear that I don't think
I did but yeah I've been interviewed and
I'm sure I'll be interviewed again do
you have any regrets or are there any
things you would do differently in
connection with either the comments you
may
if time you close the investigation or
when you then indicated to Congress that
you were in effect reopening it yeah the
honest answer is no I've asked myself
that a million times because lordy has
this been painful the only thing I
regret is it maybe answering the phone
and they called to recruit me to be FBI
director and I was living happily in
Connecticut and we would welcome you
back to Canada but I really and I've
gotten all kinds of rocks thrown at me
and this has been really hard but I
think I've done the right thing at each
turn I'm not on anybody's side so hard
for people to see that but I look I've
asked that a million times should you
have done this should you have done that
and I act the honest answer I don't mean
to say an arrogant is I wouldn't have
done it any differently
somehow I have prayed it away wished it
away wish that I was on the shores of
the Connecticut sound but failing that I
I don't have any regrets I want to ask
one last question unrelated to this
topic on the issue of gun violence would
you agree that universal background
checks would help with law enforcement
and prevention of gun violence the more
able we are to keep guns out of the
hands of criminals and spouse abusers
and all the better so the more
information we have the better for law
enforcement perspective I'll take that
as a yes thank you
all right call on senator Tillis yeah I
think we have one member that if if that
member is going to come back for first
round then we have three or four maybe
five of us that want a second round so I
hope that people get back here so we
know exactly how many people we have out
of courtesy to the senator or director
Comey there tell us director Comey thank
you for being here I'm always impressed
with your composure and your preparation
and I want to get to a couple of other
things maybe first than if I have time
come back to what the hearing has been
predominantly about when you briefed us
last year I think that you said that
there were some that there were ongoing
investigations on Homeland
Homeland Security potential terrorists
either homegrown or foreign inspired
investigations in every state is that
still the case yes do you have roughly
and can you give me roughly an idea of
the number of investigations that is
yeah it's just north of a thousand just
north of a thousand yeah we have that at
caseload of state about the same since
we last talked about it some have closed
some have opened but about a thousand
homegrown violent extremist
investigations in the United States and
at the time I also asked the question
about to what extent that you can
discuss in this setting were people who
are the target of investigations persons
who came in through various programs
where questions about vetting have been
raised as whether or not they're
accurate at the time there were there
were a dozen and a half I think that you
may have estimated you have any rough
numbers about that yeah I do if you we
have about a thousand homegrown violent
extremists investigations then we
probably have another thousand or so
that are I should define my terms
homegrown violent extremist we mean
somebody we have no indication that
they're in touch right then we have
another big group of people that we're
looking at who we see some contact with
foreign terrorists so you take that two
thousand plus cases about 300 of them
are people who came to the United States
as refugees okay and to what extent in
all of those investigations you
mentioned earlier that there are
probably about half of the various
computing devices that you've accessed
that you can't get into with any
technology that the FBI has which I
assume is some of the most advanced
available to what extent is the access
to that information relevant and these
investigations of potential homeland
threats oh it's a it's a feature of all
our work but especially concerning here
because we're trying through lawful
process figure out are they consuming
this poison on the Internet and are they
in touch with anybody and so it's true
in terrorism cases about half the
devices we can open about 90 some
percent of our subjects or using at
least one encrypted app as well
it was mr. director just because of
physical and technological constraints
half of the base of information like to
harvest you can't get to without 7:02
how much more of the remaining half
would be would be harmed
well the 702 actually addresses a
different challenge losing 702 would be
disastrous because it would lose our it
is relevant in these investigations it
is because that's what means so half of
the physical assets you can't already
get access to then there's the metadata
and all the other information that would
be instructive to these investigations
so when by going dark do we mean 100%
well we're headed towards a hundred
percent if 702 is our window into the
really bad guys overseas and if we close
that one I don't know why on earth we
would close that but we have thousands
of investigations of potential homeland
security threats evenly split by either
people who have self radicalized or some
who have been influenced some who have
come over in refugee programs that we
will basically pull the rug out from
under you in terms of being able to
actively investigate the America should
say expeditiously investigate them well
certainly significantly impair our
ability to investigate them and that's
what folks often say once you get
metadata you can't convict somebody and
incapacitate them based on that got a
drill down the director called me in my
remaining time I want to go back to the
to the investigation and I just want to
give you another opportunity to maybe
finish by explaining the context that
you were operating in but I want to I
want to create the context to going back
to when the investigation first began it
was already a part of media attention I
think on June the 27th the then Attorney
General met with the spouse of someone
who's subject to an active investigation
which was at the very least an unusual
encounter which also spun up the media
and that I think it was July 5th that
you made the statement that I think a
few of the things you've said that I
guess based on the evidence you were
gathering there was one component was
like removing a frame from a huge
finished jigsaw puzzle and dumping
pieces on the floor something else that
the media ties into then you said there
is evidence of potential violations of
statutes regarding the handling of
classified information
and you went on to say that under
circumstances a person who's engaged in
these activities would likely be subject
to security or administrative sanctions
I mean that was the tough part of the
statement that you made but you went on
to to say that you didn't believe a
reasonable minded prosecutor would bring
a case even though there was evidence of
potential violations and that you were
expressing your view that the Justice
Department should not proceed is that is
that typical for you to go to a point
and say I've gathered this information
there may be evidence of violations but
we don't think any reasonable prosecutor
and the DOJ would pursue it therefore
we're going to recommend not pursuing it
is that common for an FBI director to do
that I
I've never heard of it I never imagined
I ever until this circumstance when I
was there some logic and that at the
time that you were making that decision
based on the information that you were
provided was there the same sort of
thought process that you're going
through there to have it rise to that
level that then led to your October 28th
notification of Congress that you had to
look at other evidence that had been
identified on anthony Weiner's t see
what I've tried to do is say it looks
like you were trying to provide as much
transparency and as much real-time
information as you had yeah and then on
November the 6th the FBI apparently
moved heaven and earth and got something
done in a matter of days that they
thought was going to take beyond the
election but you were in that pressure
cooker I just wanted to give you an
opportunity to glue together I think the
decision for your actions on July the
5th and how I think there's parallels
between that and what you ultimately did
on October the 28th and then November
the 6th then I'll go back the remaining
my time for the answer and I I've lived
my whole life caring about the
credibility and the integrity of the
criminal justice process that the
American people believe it to be and
that it be in fact fair independent and
honest and so what I struggled with in
the spring of last year was how do we
credibly complete the investigation of
Hillary Clinton's
if we conclude there's no case there the
normal way to do it we'd have the
department justice announce it and I
struggled as we got closer to the end of
it
with the number of things that gone on
so which I can't talk about yet that
made me worry that the department
leadership could not credibly complete
the investigation and decline
prosecution without Grievous damage to
the American people's confidence in the
justice system and then the capper was
I'm not picking on the the Attorney
General Loretta Lynch who I like very
much but her meeting with President
Clinton on that airplane was the capper
for me and I then said you know what the
department cannot by itself credibly end
this the best chance we have is a
justice system is if I do something I
never imagined before step away from
them and tell the American people look
here's what the FBI did here's what we
found here's what we think and that that
offered us the best chance of the
American people believing in the system
that it was done in a credible way that
was a hard call for me to make to call
the Attorney General that morning and
say I'm about to do a press conference
and I'm not going to tell you what I'm
going to say and I said too I hope some
day you'll understand why I think I have
to do this but look I wasn't loving this
I knew this would be disastrous for me
personally but I thought this is the
best way to protect these institutions
that we care so much about and having
done that and then having testified
repeatedly under oath we're done this
was done in a credible way there's no
there there that when the Anthony Weiner
thing landed on me on October 27th and
there was a huge this would people
forget new step to be taken we may be
finding the golden missing emails that
would change this case if I were not to
speak about that it would be a
disastrous catastrophic concealment it
was incredibly painful choice but
actually not all that hard between very
bad and catastrophic I had to tell
Congress that we were taking these
additional steps I prayed to find a
third door I couldn't find it - actions
speak or conceal I don't think many
reasonable people would do it
differently than I did no matter what
they say today if you were standing
there staring at that on October 28th
would you really conceal that so I spoke
again the design was to act credibly
independently and honestly so the
American people know the system is not
in any way and that's why I felt
transparency was the best path in July
and then I wasn't seeking transparency
in October I sent that letter only to
the chairs and rankings yeah that I know
they were going to leak it of course I
know how Congress works but I did not
make an announcement at that point and
then you're my amazing people moved
heaven and earth to do what was
impossible to get through those emails
by working 24 hours a day and then said
honestly sir we found tons of new stuff
doesn't change our view and I said are
you sure don't do it just because you're
under pressure they said we're sure we
don't believe is a case against Hillary
Clinton and I said then by god I got to
tell Congress that and no I'm going to
get a storm at me for that but what I
can promise you all along is I said to
people you may think we're idiots were
honest people we made judgments trying
to do the right thing and I believe even
with hindsight we made the right
decisions and I'm sorry for that long
answer director Comey I we have 7 times
6 is 42 minutes I hope you won't want to
take a break I'm made of stone thank you
on March 6 I wrote to you asking about
the FBI's relationship with the author
of the Trump Russia dossier
Christopher Steele most of these
questions have not been answered so I'm
going to ask them now prior to the
bureau launching the investigation of
the ledge ties between the Trump
campaign and Russia did anyone from the
FBI have interactions with mr. Steele
regarding the issue it's not a question
that I can answer in this forum as you
know I've briefed you privately on this
and if there's more that's necessary
then I'd be happy to do it privately
have have you ever represented to a
judge that the FBI had interaction with
mr. Steele whether by name or not
regarding alleged ties between the Trump
campaign and Russia prior to the bureau
launching its investigation of the
matter I have to give you the same
answer mr. chairman this one I'm going
to expect an answer on do FBI policies
the policies allow it to pay an outside
investigator for work another source is
also paying him for as well want me to
repeat it do FBI policies allow it to
pay an outside investigator for work
that another source is also paying that
investigator for I don't know for sure
as I said here I possibly is my answer
but I'll get you a precise answer in
writing sure okay
did the FBI provide any payments
whatsoever to mr. steel related to the
investigation of Trump associates I'm
back to my first I can't answer in this
forum was the FBI aware was the FBI
aware that mr. steel reportedly paid his
sources who in turn paid their sub
sources to make the claim in the dossier
same answer sir here's one you ought to
be able to answer is it vital to know is
it vital to know whether or not sources
have been paid in order to evaluate
their credibility and if they have been
paid doesn't that information need to be
disclosed if you're relying on that
information in seeking approval for
investigative authority I think in
general yes I think it is vital to know
the FBI and the Justice Department have
provide provide me material inconsistent
answers in closed settings about its
reported relationship with mr. steel
will you commit to fully answering the
questions from my March 6th and April
28th the letter and providing all
requested documents so that we can
resolve those inconsistencies even if in
a closed session being necessary because
as I sit here I don't know all the
questions are in the letters I don't
want to answer that specifically but I
commit to you to giving you all the
information you need to address just
that challenge because I don't believe
there's any inconsistency I think
there's a misunderstanding but
in a classified setting I'll give you
what you need okay well I hope to show
you those inconsistencies now and I
think I know what your Europe where the
confusion is but I think in a classified
setting we can straighten it out
question next question according to a
complaint filed with the Justice
Department the company that oversaw
dossiers creation was also working with
a former Russian intelligence operate
operative on a pro-russian lobbying
project at the same time the company
fusion GPS allegedly failed to register
as a foreign agent for its work to
undermine the Magnitsky Act which is a
law that lets the president punish
Russian officials who violate human
rights before I sent you a letter about
this were you aware of the complaint
against fusion was acting as an
unregistered
agent for Asian interest it's not a
question I can answer
in this forum we can't answer that no no
I can't
go on to something else last week the
FBI filed a declaration in court
pursuant to a Freedom of Information Act
litigations the FBI said that a grand
jury issued subpoenas or Secretary
Clinton's emails yet you refuse to tell
this committee whether the FBI saw it or
had been denied access to grand jury
process from the Justice Department so I
think a very simple question why does
the FBI give more information to someone
who files a lawsuit then to an oversight
committee in the Congress and that has
happened to me several times I'm not
sure senator whether that's what
happened here but you're right I refuse
to confirm in our hearings as to whether
we'd used a grand jury and how I think
that's the right position because I
don't know it well enough I don't think
I can tell you I don't think I can
distinguish the statements made in the
FOIA case as I sit here but yeah just as
a matter of proposition then if I Chuck
Grassley is a private citizen file a
Freedom of Information Act and you give
me more information than you'll give to
Senator Chuck Grassley how do you
justify that yeah it's a good question I
don't wait it's a good question how do
you justify it but I was gonna say it's
a good question I can't as I sit here
eat God's was the Clinton investigation
named operation mid-year because it
needed to be finished before the
Democratic National Convention if so why
the artificial deadlines if not why was
that the name certainly not because it
had to be finished by a particular date
there's an art and a science to how we
come up with code names for cases they
assure me it's done randomly sometimes I
see ones that make me smile so I'm not
sure but I can assure you that it was
called mid-year exam was the name of the
case I can assure you the name was not
selected for any nefarious purpose or
because of any timing on the
investigation last question when was a
grand jury convened was it
for you your first public statement
about closing the case I'm still not in
a position where I'm comfortable
confirming whether and how we use the
grand jury in an open setting I don't
know enough about what was said in the
FOIA case to know whether that makes my
answer silly but I just want to be so
careful about talking about grand jury
matters that's sir senator Feinstein
thanks very much mr. chairman mr.
director first of all thank you for your
fortitude going through this appreciate
it in your testimony you noted that the
first half of the fiscal year the FBI
was unable to access the content of more
than 3,000 mobile devices even though
the FBI had the legal authority to do so
I'm familiar with one of those and that
is the Southern California terrorist
attack which where 14 people were killed
in San Bernardino of those 3,000 devices
that you weren't able to access can you
say how many of these were related to a
counterterrorism event I don't know as I
sit here senator but we can get you that
information yeah I really very much
appreciate that we had looked at
legislation that would take into
consideration events of national
security and provide that devices it
must be some way of even going before a
judge in getting a court order to be
able to open a device do you think that
would work well that would sure to my
mind be a better place for us to be from
a public safety perspective but we
aren't there now in terms this week the
British Parliament's Home Affairs
Secretary released a report finding that
social media platforms such as Facebook
Twitter and you
two failed to remove extremist material
posted by banned jihadist and neo-nazi
groups even when that material was
reported the committee urged tech
companies to pay for and publicize
online content monitoring activities and
called on the British government to
strengthen laws related to the
publication of such material last year I
worked with senators Burr Rubio and
Nelson to introduce a bill to require
tech companies to report terrorist
activity on their platforms to law
enforcement what do you advise the
provision we modeled it after an
existing law which requires tech
companies to notify authorities about
cases of child pornography but does not
require companies to monitor any user
subscriber or customer
I plan to re-enter introduce the
provision in separate legislation so
here two questions with the FBI benefit
from knowing when technology companies
see terrorist plotting and other illegal
activity online yes would the FBI be
willing to work with the Judiciary
Committee going forward on this
provision yes senator I don't know it
well enough to offer you a view but we'd
be happy to work with you on it
well I I was so struck when San
Bernardino happened and you made
overtures to allow that device to be
opened and then the FBI had to spend
nine hundred thousand dollars to hack it
open and as I subsequently learned of
some of the reason for it there were
good reasons to get into that device and
the concern I have is that once people
have been killed in it
terrorist attack and there may be other
DNA there may be other messages that
lead an investigative agency to believe
that there are others out there isn't it
to the for the protection of the public
that one would want to be able to see if
a device could be opened and I've had a
very hard time I've tried gone out I've
tried to talk to the tech companies
there in my state one Facebook was very
good and understood the problem but most
do not have the FBI ever talked with the
tech companies about this need in
particular yes senator we've had a lot
of conversations and as I said earlier
they're in my sense they've been getting
more productive because I think the tech
companies have come to see the darkness
a little bit more my concern was privacy
is really important but I'm not that
they didn't see the public safety costs
I think they're starting to see that
better and what nobody wants to have
happen is something terrible happened in
the United States and it be connected to
our inability to access information with
lawful authority that we ought to have
the conversations before that happens
and the company's more and more get that
I think over the last year and a half
and but it's vital we weren't picking on
Apple in the San Bernardino case there
were real reasons why we need to get
into that device and and that is true in
case after case after case which is why
we have to figure out a way to optimize
those two things privacy and public
safety well to be candid my
understanding about some of this was
that the European community had special
concerns about privacy and that some of
the companies in our country were
concerned well they would lose business
that European concern is changing I
think what I read about the UK what I
understand is happening in France and
Germany increased sharing of
intelligence the realization I
think that they have very dangerous
people
in large numbers possibly plotting at
any given time to carry out an attack
has had some palliative effect and there
may be a change of viewpoint so it would
be very helpful if our law enforcement
community could help us and this is not
to monitor this is something that's very
basic if there is a piece of evidence it
says hey there may be a cell there may
be another individual out there you have
a chance of getting into that piece of
evidence to see if that's true all right
with the judge's permission with the
judge's permission that's correct
so I thank you for that thank you so
Thank You mr. chairman we Sandra Lee
hasn't had first round so I got to go to
senator Lee Thank You mr. chairman
thank you for coming for being here
today and thanks for your service to our
country I want to talk to you about
something raised by one of my colleagues
a little while ago about electronic
communications transaction records would
it be fair to say that electronic
communications transaction records
include such things as browsing history
one's history of websites that one might
have visited on the Internet yes but
would it be fair to say also that what
one views what pages one has visited
might in some ways be indicative of what
one is reading potentially you're right
even if you don't have see where they
went on the page that they went to ESPN
or some fishing magazine gives you some
indication of their interests yes
individually and collectively you can
find out a fair amount about a person
especially if you're able to review what
it is that they've been reading for a
certain period of time right your only
reason hesitating is as I understand it
we can't look at all we get as the
websites visited not where they went on
the page or what they clicked on but it
does give some indication of your
interest just like what you call gives
you some indication of your interests
but where they went on the website will
also be indicative of what they did on
the website would it not I mean if you
can get that granular information about
what
subpart not just that they went to ESPN
but they went to ESPN and read this or
that article right my understanding is
that we can't with an NSL as we
understand the statute get that sub
content we can get the webpage visited
we can't get where they navigate it
within the website that's I may be wrong
about that but I think that's how we are
within the existing confines of the law
correct and so for those who are
proposing that we change existing law so
as to allow you to use a National
Security Letter to go further as was
suggested by one of my colleagues
earlier today that then would allow you
to get this more granular information no
I'm sorry I may have screwed this up as
we understand the way Ector was intended
to be under to be used that our NSL
authority under Ector as we thought it
was and as we hope it will be changed is
limited to that top level website visit
address correct so even if it's changed
the way we hope it will be we don't get
any deeper into what what you looked at
on a page it's as if we're able to see
what sporting goods store you called
we can't tell from the call record what
you asked about we can see what sporting
page you visited what website but we
can't see where you went within that you
know based on the legislation that I've
reviewed it's not my recollection that
that is the case what I've been told is
that it it would not necessarily be the
policy of the government to use it to go
to that level of granularity but that
the language itself would allow it is
that inconsistent with your
understanding it is and my understanding
is we're not looking for that Authority
you don't want that Authority that's my
understanding what we'd like is the
functional equivalent of the dialing
information where you the address you
emailed to or the or the webpage you
went to not where you went within it
even if you look at it at the broad
level of abstraction so if you're
suggesting it would be used only at the
domain name level somebody went to
espn.com if you follow someone's
browsing history over a long period of
time you could still find out a fair
amount about that person could you know
yes sure yeah and again I keep saying
this but I mean it as you can from their
telephone dialing history yes let's talk
about section 702 for a minute
section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance
let's act authorizes the surveillance
the use of us signals surveillance
equipment to obtain foreign intelligence
information the definition includes
information that is directly related to
national security
but it also includes quote information
that is relevant to the Foreign Affairs
of the United States close quote
regardless of whether that foreign
affairs related information is relevant
to a national security threat to your
knowledge has the Attorney General or
has the DNI ever used section 702 to
target individuals abroad in a situation
unrelated to a national security threat
not that I'm aware of I think I could be
wrong but I don't think so I think it's
confined a counterterrorism to espionage
to counter proliferation and those those
are the buckets okay as I say cyber but
cyber is fits with that's where it has
typically used those things does it so
to your knowledge it doesn't currently
use section 702 to target people abroad
in instances unrelated to national
security threats I don't think so like a
diplomat to find out how someone feels
about a particular foreign policy issue
or something I don't think so right so
if section 702 were narrowed to exclude
such information to exclude information
that is relevant to foreign affairs but
not relevant to a national security
threat would that mean that the
government would be able to obtain the
information it needs in order to protect
national security would seem so
logically mean to me the value of 702 is
exactly that where the rubber hits the
road in the national security context
especially counterterrorism
counter-proliferation yeah now when
section 702 is used typically what we're
talking about here is not metadata it's
not this call was made to from this
number to this number this is content
and so if if we were talking about two
u.s. persons two American citizens
if I were calling you typically that's
not something that section 702 would be
used to collect but if it's if it's me
calling
someone else and if that person is not a
US person if that person ends up being
an agent of a foreign government and if
somebody has determined that
communications involving that person
might be connected to a national
security investigation there's a a
chance that that communication could be
intercepted not just the fact that call
was made but also the content of that
call correct that that's what we call
incidental collection and that
incidental collection is then aggregated
you have databases that store all these
things and so there are lots of US
persons who have had communications
conversations that have themselves been
recorded that are out there and in a
database can you search that database
for communications involving specific US
persons without getting a warrant yes
and the fact that these communications
were intercepted without necessarily any
showing of wrongdoing on the part of the
US person without necessarily showing
that that US person had anything to do
with the foreign that with the national
security investigation at issue does
that cause you concern that that could
involve almost a backdoor way of going
after communications by US persons in
which they have a reasonable expectation
of privacy it doesn't cause me concern
but it may be because of the way what I
can see from where I am I understand the
question though but it's true whether
it's 702 or other court authorized
domestic surveillance in the United
States if we are covering a particular
embassy of a foreign power and Americans
call in and speak to them we record that
because we're authorized to collect the
communications in and out of that
embassy and we store all of those in a
database where we have lawfully
collected those even though the American
who called wasn't a target the same
happens with 702 if you contact or call
a terrorist or someone we're targeting
overseas you're an American you have a
conversation even though you're not the
target that's going to be collected and
stored in a database what matters is how
we treat that data and that we're
careful with it and we don't use it
willy-nilly and we protect it in
important ways that's true whether we
collected in 702 are collected
domestically I don't know how we would
operate otherwise
and that's yeah I don't know how we
would operate otherwise I think what the
American people want us to do is make
sure we hold it so we can connect dots
if it turns out there's something bad in
there but treat it like the u.s. person
information that it is protected and
make sure that it's handled in a
responsible way thank you thank you
thank you miss chairman director let me
let me tell you a story about a hundred
years ago literally my Italian
grandparents and my Irish grandparents
faced discrimination because of their
religion now that discrimination wasn't
violence it was economic this was not
unusual in this country at that time I
like to think that's gone I like to
think of my grandparents the Italian
grandparents the Irish grandparents
discrimination they faced because of
both their race and their religion is
not here but now we see alarming rise in
hate crimes among minority communities
yesterday this committee heard some
important testimony from the Department
of Justice from the International
Association of Chiefs of Police
I believe our nation's largest civil
rights organization the law enforcement
and political leaders I send the message
that toxic hateful rhetoric would not be
tolerated
they must denounce bigotry wherever they
encounter even as a child I was taught
that we are never to discriminate
against anybody because of their race or
their religion now what bothers me let
me show you this on the campaign trail
President Trump promises supporters a
Muslim ban a campaign press release
entitled Donald J J Trump's statement on
preventing Muslim immigration says they
called for a total and complete shutdown
of Muslims entering the United States
now I can understand
the dumb things are said during a
campaign that's on his website today
that goes beyond being stupid do you
agree with me the messages like that can
cast suspicion on our Muslim neighbors
can perpetuate division and hatred if it
does does that make America less safe
senator thank you I'm not going to
comment on the particular statement but
I do agree that a perception or a
reality of hostility towards any
community but in this particular the
Muslim American community makes our jobs
harder because as I said in response to
an earlier question those good people
don't want people engaging in acts of
violence on the in the name of their
faith or in their neighborhood and so
our interests are aligned
but if anything gets in the way of that
and chills their their openness to talk
to us and to tell us what they see it
makes it harder for us to find those
threats so we've been spending a ton of
time you're right about the increase in
hate crimes we've seen those numbers
start to go up in 2014 they've been
climbing since then to redouble our
efforts to get in those communities and
show them our hearts and what we're like
to encourage people not to fear contact
with us and director Comey I don't ask
this to make a political point I asked
this as United States Senator I believe
the United States Senate can be and
sometimes has been the conscience of the
nation we're a nation that hearings our
First Amendment we trust them can we
believe in all religions allow you to
practice any religion you want or none
if you want I worry but it's the Muslim
religion or any other you have religions
where people believe in it they should
not be condemned of actions of a few I
worry very much that the rhetoric and
hatred can bring about things
neither you nor I ever want to see in
this country I think would agree on that
hate crimes I don't care who it's
against against somebody because of the
race of the religion you as a head of
the FBI any one of us have been
prosecutors we abhor all hate crimes and
I believe you do is that not collects
for sure
and I worry that we also give the
impression that citizenship alone might
be a reliable indicator of the terrorist
threat posed by an individual to the
United States I think of the Oklahoma
City bombing one of the greatest acts of
terrorism in our country done by the
Americans incident it served
I believe honorably in our military so
would you agree the citizenship alone is
not a reliable indicator of a terrorist
threat posed by an individual to the
United States correct most of the people
that I talked about that we have open
cases on are American citizens
thank you back the Department of
Homeland Security that we've heard from
them they have an assessment from the
office of intelligence and analysis
conclude the citizenship his own like
they'd be a reliable indicator of
potential terrorist activity do you
agree with that yes you not matter
chairman Grassley I've worked to address
the concerns related to the FBI's here
and Piper analysis testimonies been
flawed I think we all accept the past
vestigation began and I believe 2012
after three men were exonerated here in
Washington DC because the FBI animus
gave in
testimony hoarders review more than 3000
cases the FBI's reached out to houses
originally prosecuted these cases and I
appreciate that
I main concern that cases remain closed
if you don't find the transcript right
away I've asked you this question in
writing the in case is there where
there's a missing transcript you commit
to have an FBI conduct an in-person
visit to obtain whether there was
information that was used and possibly
faulty analysis by the FBI that might
have brought about a conviction I'm
sorry an in-person visit both to the
prosecutor's office whoever else may be
involved if you don't have a transcript
an in-person visit to say okay was what
do you record showed do you did you use
analyses that may have been faulty from
the FBI and bring about the conviction I
see I I don't know enough to react to
that now and commit to it now
can I follow up with you to see how
we're thinking about that will you
follow up I will bring to you okay thank
you thank you Senator Leahy Sarah White
House thank you um a couple of quick
matters for starters did you give
Hillary Clinton quote a free pass for
many bad deeds there was a tweet to that
effect from the president no not that
was not my intention certainly well did
you give her a free pass from any bad
deeds whatever your intention may have
been we conducted a competent honest and
independent investigation closed it
while offering transparency to the
American people I believed what I said
there was not a prosecutable case there
the with respect to the question of
prosecution for classified material is
the question of the consequences of the
disclosure ie the harm from the release
or the actual secrecy of the material
considered in a prosecute
of decision in my experience it is yes
because there's a great deal of material
that while technically classified is
widely known to the public and because
over-classification is a very
significant problem within the executive
branch correct correct and DOJ reserves
prosecution for the most serious matters
of my experience and that would have
been evaluated also in looking at
secretary Clinton's emails yes so
although they were classified they may
not have caused any harm in terms of who
saw them will may not make it specific
to that there are emails that could be
classified and cause no harm if they
were disclosed yes there are that is the
case it has been disclosed and publicly
reported that there was a two-day
interval between the FBI interview of
Michael Flynn related to his
conversations with ambassador kis lyac
and then Deputy Attorney General's
report to White House Counsel about
those calls did you participate in
conversations related to this matter
during that two-day interval and what
can you tell us about why that interval
took two days was there some standard
operating procedure that needed to be
vindicated was there you'd think that
that could have flipped over to a
conversation to the White House a good
deal quicker than that once the agents
report came back from the interview yeah
I don't I don't know whether the two
days is right I think it might have been
a day I could be wrong could have been
two days and I did participate in
conversations about that matter and I
think I'll stop there because I don't I
don't know the department's position I'm
speaking about those communications but
as you sit here you don't have any
hesitation about that delay about any it
representing any kind of you know
mischief or misconduct no no it given
your experience you know how this works
an agent conducts an interview they're
going to come back they write up a 302
they show it to their partner they make
sure they get it right then they produce
the 302 so sometimes it's the
next day before it's finished so the
deputy midgets would have seen the 302
and that process would have taken place
by the time she went up to see white
House Counsel McGann I think that's
right yes okay thank you and on to the
Weiner laptop as I understand it you
were informed by agents in the FBI
office that there was potentially
related or relevant information in mr.
Weiner's laptop on the basis of that
information you then sent a letter to
the members of Congress before whom you
had committed to answer if there were
any changes in the status of things you
also then authorized the agents to
pursue a search warrant which then gave
them access to the content which allowed
them to do the search that you then said
came up with nothing so that you could
then undo the letter and say actually we
took a look and there's nothing there is
that the do I have the order correctly
they're right they came to me they
briefed me on what they could see from
the metadata why it was significant they
thought that I seek a search warrant one
of my approval to do that
I agreed authorized it so did the
Department of Justice and then they
reviewed it was just making sure I get
the numbers right during the following
week they reviewed 40,000 emails I
understated how many they reviewed and
found that 3,000 of them were
work-related and came from blackberry
backups and a bunch of other things in
like 12 of them were classified but we'd
seen them all before you know so they
finished that work they briefed me on it
and say it doesn't change our view and
then I send the second letter did any of
those classified emails create national
security damage that's hard one answer
by definition a classification is based
on the potential national security
damage with respect to our earlier
conversation that tons of stuff is
classified that is on the front page of
the
times I'm not aware that any of these
emails or any of the emails in the
investigation got into the hands of
people they were able to exploit them to
damage our national security so let me
offer you this hypothetical they come to
you and say the metadata shows that we
have potential information here that
could be relevant could cause us to
reopen the information it would seem to
me that it would be as sensible at that
moment to say how quickly can you get a
search warrant and how quickly can we
get an answer to that question because I
made a promise to people in Congress
that I would get back to them with this
information and if there's anything real
here you need to get on that pronto so
that I can answer that question so that
the search warrant precedes the letter
rather than the letter preceding the
search warrant particularly in light of
the widely adhered to policy the
department not to disclose ongoing
investigative materials and the truly
exceptional nature of disclosures yeah
why not the search warrant first
well I pressed them very hard on that
and found credible their response is
that there was no way no way they could
review the volume of information they
saw on the laptop in the time remaining
except that they did well they did and
because our wizards and our operational
technology division came up with a way
to D dupe electronically that as I
understand it involved writing a custom
software program that's going to help us
in lots of other areas but investigative
team said sir we cannot finish this
before the election so that to my mind
that then made the judgment appropriate
the one that I made not waiting waiting
waiting to make the disclosure okay and
with just respect to your response to
secretary to Senator Tillis we can talk
about it some other time my time has
expired but lest silence be viewed as
consent I have a different view of what
took place I don't don't doubt your
honesty for a minute but I do think that
they were very significant mistakes made
through this process
in which in the email case yes okay
in the Hillary Clinton email case yes
thank you to the ranking member and I
admire your hanging in there and being
made of stone was it
sandstone I think I I just want to
clarify some something some of the
answers that you gave me for example in
response to director I asked you would
president Trump's tax returns be
material to such an investigation the
Russian investigation and does the
investigation have access to president
Trump's tax returns and some other
questions you answered I can't say and
I'd like to get a clarification on that
is is it that you can't say or you can't
say in this setting then I won't answer
questions about the contours of the
investigation as I sit here I don't know
whether I would do it in a closed
setting either but for sure I don't want
to begin answering questions about what
we're looking at and how okay so I'll
take that as at least in this setting
you can't do that and maybe you can
elsewhere we're talking about some of
the the number of the unusual number of
individuals in important roles in the
Trump campaign or in his life and
they're sort of unexpected and often
undisclosed ties to to Russia and I'd
like to focus on one of those
individuals Roger stone and his
relationship with gusoff er 2.0 whisper
2.0 is an online persona that the IC
concluded was used by Russian military
intelligence to leaked documents
and emails stolen from the Democratic
National Committee to WikiLeaks the US
intelligence community including the FBI
has since concluded that the Russian
Russian government directed the breach
and that Russian military intelligence
used gusoff er 2.0 to ensure that the
documents obtained were publicly
released
so while gusoff er has insisted that he
or she is not Russian the intelligence
community has concluded that the hacker
has strong ties to Moscow and was used
by Russian military intelligence to weak
information about the Clinton campaign
and Democrats that was stolen by Russia
is that director Comey a fair
characterization yes gusu art the ICC
judgment was gusoff er 2.0 was an
instrument of the Russian intelligence
thank you well a few months back it was
revealed that in August of last year
that's a couple months before the 2016
election Roger stone one of president
Trump's long-standing political mentors
and at one time a formal campaign
adviser exchanged a number of private
messages with gusoff er 2.0 via Twitter
mr. stone has since insisted that the
relationship was totally innocuous now
in this series of messages goofer 2.0
and mr. stone exchanged a number of
bizarre pleasantries because the Fuhrer
thanks mr. stone for writing about him
and mr. stone expresses delight that
goose AFER's Twitter handle was
reinstated after having been suspended
but in one message goes for rights to
mr. stone quote I'm pleased to say that
you are a great man please tell me if I
can help you anyhow it would be a great
pleasure to me director Comey to me this
sounds like a clearer offer from a
Russian intelligence operative to
collaborate with a senior official on
the Trump campaign
is that a throwaway line or an offer to
help stone in some respect do we know
whether any further communication
between stone and goose fur took place
and if you can't say here or can't say
and but you could say in a another
classified environment but could you
make that distinction I definitely
cannot say here I don't think I would
say in a classified environment because
it calls for questions about what we're
looking at and and how and so but I
definitely can't say here okay well at
the very least stones conversation with
goose fur demonstrated once again that
the Trump campaign officials were
communicating with Russian operatives
what is less clear however is whether
the Trump campaign ever provided
direction to Russian operatives or aware
that specific actions were being carried
out to influence the election for
example it has been suggested that last
year the Russians used thousands of paid
trolls human trolls we know those and
botnets the flood the internet
particularly social media and with fake
news aimed at influencing the election
and favoring President Trump I'm curious
whether such actions were part of a
coordinated effort is there any evidence
that the Trump campaign assisted or
directed those efforts that something
that I can't answer here but I would
refer you back to what I said was the
purpose of the investigation to
understand whether there were any
coordination or collusion between
elements of the campaign and the
Russians of course and I would point out
to that that right before the Podesta
emails came out that Roger stone said
it's it look it's soon going to be time
for Podesta's time in the barrel and so
I think there may be a little bit of
there there before I I just want to I
only have 30 seconds so I'm I want to
say this I know senator Cornyn isn't
here I think it's a shame that he said
that Hillary yesterday in this forum
blamed everyone but herself she took a
lot of blame on herself in the in that
forum and I think she when she
referenced what you did and in 11 days
for the election which has been a
subject here that and also the Russian
interference I think she was only saying
stuff that other people have said I
don't think she was saying anything that
that a lot a lot of people also think
had had an effect on the election so I
just think it was a shame that that the
senator from Texas I don't know if he
meant to leave that out deliberately but
she did not blame everyone but herself
Thank You mr. chairman
say before I call on the next senator
there's two things I'd like to say one
would be for what you promised senator
Cruz about a briefing on the garland
situation that you would include any of
the staff of the committee in on that
briefing as well so we have a committee
briefing on it as well at least at the
staff level would you do that assuming
they have the clearances for it I don't
think that's a problem at all I'll do
that
I guess that's that's obvious the second
thing is after we have two more people
have second round before they get done I
have to go and I want to thank you for
being here senator Feinstein I'll pose
down the meaty thank you thank you saw I
think under the previous order senator
Hirono was ahead of you
chairman I'm I'm happy to follow senator
Verona okay thank you
as mentioned earlier director in March
President Trump issued a revised
refugees and visa ban executive order
that suspended entry into the u.s. from
six majority Muslim countries the
suspicion was this suspension was
largely promised on the claim that quote
more than three hundred persons who
entered the United States are refugees
are currently set the subjects of
counterterrorism investigations by the
Federal Bureau of Investigation end
quote can you provide any additional
information on whether the persons under
investigation are from the six countries
subject to the suspension and are these
persons exclusively from the six
countries subject to the suspension and
if not what other countries are
represented among the population that is
currently under investigation I'm sure
we can provide you what I can tell you
here is I think I think about a third of
them are from the six countries of so
300 about a third of them from the six
countries I think two-thirds of those
were from the seventh country Iraq that
was not included but but I'll make sure
my staff gets you the precise numbers
senator so Iraq is the only other
country that was not among the six
targeted countries I think that's right
obviously as you ask it I'm wondering
whether I'm wrong and so I'll get you
the precise numbers but I came I think
it was refugees about 300 about a third
from the six countries about two-thirds
from Iraq that's my rank you can provide
the information later thank you very
much now can you provide additional
information on the percentage of these
individuals who came to the US as
children
I can't as I sit here I'm sure we can
get you that you check that thank you
and can you provide additional
information on the percentage of these
individuals who are radicalized after
having been in our country for a long
period of time however way you would
describe that's a harder one because
it's very hard to
figure out when someone is radicalized
and then when it happened
I'll ask my folks to think about what
information we can get you on that we'll
do our best yes thank you probably
during the course of your investigation
you might be able to ascertain when they
became radicalized we went turning to
the death threats against certain judges
we have an administration that
challenged us federal judges who
disagree with President Trump's views
we've seen this in the campaign and
during his presidency following Judge
Derek Watson's ruling blocking the
president's revised travel ban judge
Watson who sits on the Hawaii District
Court judge Watson began receiving death
threats I understand the u.s. marshals
have primary responsibility for the
production of federal judges but that
the FBI FBI is poised to step in if
necessary is the FBI investigating the
threats made against judge Watson I
believe we are I was last week visited
the Honolulu field office and got
briefed on our work again to assist the
marshals in trying to understand the
threats and protect the judge I believe
we are and then in February the three
ninth circuit judges who rule against
the president's first travel ban also
began receiving threats is the FBI
investigating those threats I don't know
that one for sure I bet we are but I
can't answer with confidence as I sit
here so can we say that any time a
federal judges are threatened that the
FBI would likely be involved in
investigation investigating those
threats in most circumstances the
marshals have the primary responsibility
and in my experience they very very
often ask us for assistance on our what
information we may have some of our
technical resources they're pretty darn
good but in most cases I think we offer
assistance and are the president's
continued attacks on the judiciary in
bowling involving our individuals to
make these sorts of threats we're in an
environment where some people might
think that it's okay to issue these
kinds of threats against judges who
disagree with the president that's not
something I think I can comment on it's
concerning whenever people are
making threats of judges because their
independence and insulation from
influence whether fear or favor is at
the core of the whole justice system
which is why we take them so seriously
yes and so speaking of the independence
of not just the judiciary but I'd like
you to clarify the FBI's independence
from the DOJ apparatus can the FBI
conduct an investigation independent
from the Department of Justice or does
the FBI have to disclose all its
investigations to the DOJ does it have
to get the Attorney General's consent
well we work with the Department of
Justice whether that's main justice or
US Attorneys offices on all of our
investigations and so we work with them
and so in in a in a legal sense we're
not independent of the Department of
Justice we are spiritually culturally
pretty independent group and that's the
way you would want it but yeah we work
with the Department Justice on all of
our investigations so if the Attorney
General are senior officials at the
Department of Justice opposes a specific
investigation can they halt that FBI
investigation in theory yes has it
happened not in my experience because it
would be a big deal to tell the FBI to
stop doing something that without a
appropriate purpose
we're oftentimes they give us opinions
that we don't see a case there and so
you ought to stop investing resources in
it but I'm talking about a situation
where we were told to stop something for
a political reason that would be a very
big deal it's not happened in my
experience well a number of us have
called for an independent investigator
or a special prosecutor to investigate
the the Russian efforts to undermine or
to interfere with our elections as well
as the Trump teams relationships with
these these Russian efforts and should
the department Justice decide that there
should be such as independent
investigator special prosecutor and you
already have an ongoing FBI
investigation into these matters how and
the Attorney General has already recused
themselves so Howard
how would this proceed when you have the
Department of Justice conducting or
assigning an independent or special
prosecutor and then you're already doing
an investigation how would this work our
investigative team would just coordinate
with a different set of prosecutors it's
as if a case was moved from one US
Attorney's office to another the
investigative team just starts working
with a different set of assistant US
Attorney's you don't you don't miss it
so the two investigations could proceed
but you would talk to each other right
it's gone in but it's one investigation
and the strength of the justice system
at the federal level in the United
States is the prosecutors and the agents
work together on their investigations
and so the investigators would disengage
from one prosecutor and hook up to
another and just continue going so in
the investigations that you're currently
doing on the Russian interference and
the Trump teams relationship are you
coordinating with any US Attorney's
Office those investigations two sets of
prosecutors main justice the National
Security Division and the Eastern
District of Virginia US Attorney's
Office so should the AG decide to go
with a special prosecutor then you would
end your engagement with these other two
entities and work with the DOJ well I
could have mishegoss Skinner potentially
or it could be that in some
circumstances and Attorney General
appoints someone else to oversee it and
you keep the career level prosecute of
team and so to the prosecutors and the
agents there's no change except the boss
is different if I could just ask one
more follow up question so this has this
happened before where you're doing an
investigation and the Attorney General
appoints a special prosecutor to conduct
the same investigation it happened to me
when I was in what I thought was my last
job ever in the government as Deputy
Attorney General and I appointed Patrick
Fitzgerald then the US attorney in
Chicago to oversee a very sensitive
investigation involving allegations that
Bush administration officials out at a
CIA operative and so what happened is
the team of agents that had been working
for up a chain that came to me was
moved over and worked up under Patrick
Fitzgerald okay thank you so it happens
thank you man editor last before firmly
sir thank you madam chair
to take the analogy that you began with
I think we're at the end of the Dennis
visit or toward the end of it anyway and
fortunately there's no unlimited time
that the last questioner can take I
dentist sometimes ask questions to to to
pursue the line of questioning that
senator Hirono just just finished there
is abundant precedent is there not for
the appointment of a special prosecutor
in fact there are regulations and
guidelines for the appointment of a
special prosecutor yes and that has
happened frequently in the history of
the Department of Justice you mentioned
one in your experience also then
designee attorney general Richardson
appointed a special prosecutor Archibald
Cox who then pursued the Watergate
investigation correct yes there's been
many examples of it so this would not be
a earth-shaking seismic occurrence for a
special prosecutor to be a point in fact
taking your record which is one of
dedication to the credibility and
integrity of our criminal justice
process and your families I would think
that at some point you might recommend
that there be a special prosecutor would
that be appropriate at some point it's
possible I know one of my predecessors
did it Louis Freeh did it with respect
to a Clinton administration issue about
Chinese interference and election so
it's possible and I take your contention
that you don't want to talk about your
conversations with the current Deputy
Attorney General but my hope is that you
will in fact are you forcefully and
vigorously for the appointment and
special prosecutor I think that the
circumstances here are
exactly parallel to the situation where
you appointed Patrick astera Fitzpatrick
and others where routinely special
prosecutors have been appointed and I
know that your recommendation may never
be disclosed but I would urge that that
you do so going back to the questions
that you were asked about your
announcement initially that you were
terminating the investigation of Hillary
Clinton you said that the matter was one
of intense public interest and therefore
you were making additional comments
about it normally there would have been
no comments correct correct and at most
you would have said as you did just now
there was no prosecutable case correct
correct
and you went beyond that statement and
said that she had been extremely
careless I believe was the word that you
used which was an extraordinary comment
would you agree that the investigation
of the Trump campaigns potential
involvement in the Russian interference
is also an investigation of intense
public interest yes I agree in fact
they're probably very few investigations
that will be done while your FBI
director that will be of more intense
public interest and my question is will
you commit to explaining the results of
the investigation at the time when it is
concluded I won't commit to it senator
but I do commit to apply the same
principles and and reasoning to it I
just don't know where we'll end up so I
can't commit sitting here but you would
agree that
as the FBI director you would need to go
beyond simply saying there's no
prosecutable case or there is a
prosecutable case potentially when I was
US Attorney many years ago there was
actually a rule in the Department of
Justice that there could be no report on
any grand jury matter or any
investigation without permission of the
Attorney General or main justice I don't
know where that rule still applies but
speaking more generally do you think
it's a good idea for prosecutors or
yourself to be able to comment in some
way to explain the results of an
investigation not in general I don't I
think it I think it's important that
there be as there has been for a long
time a recognized exception for the
exceptional case I referred to the IRS
alleged targeting investigation which
would also have intense public interest
and then actually had someone prepare
for me a chart the department has done
it infrequently but done it a dozen or
more times in the last 5-10 years it
ought to be reserved for those
extraordinary cases but there are times
where the public interest warrants it
with respect to the investigation
ongoing into the Trump associates ties
to the Russian meddling has the White
House cooperated with the investigation
correct it's not something I'm going to
comment on have you had any requests for
immunity from anyone potentially a
target of that investigation I have to
give you the same answer senator would
you tell this committee if there is a
lack of cooperation on the part of the
White House I won't commit to that isn't
there
again another reason for there to be a
special prosecutor because who would you
complain to the Deputy Attorney General
if there were a lack of cooperation on
the part of the Trump White House if
there was a challenge with any
investigation that I couldn't
at the working level I would elevate it
to the Deputy Attorney General whoever
was in charge of it but the Deputy
Attorney General is appointed by the
president correct correct
isn't that at inherent conflict of
interest it's it's a consideration but
also the nature of the person in the
role is also a very important
consideration I think we're lucky to
have somebody who thinks about the
justice system very some of the way I do
in Fatt Fitzgerald does and the way you
did and let me ask again to just clarify
a question that senator Hirono asked the
career prosecutors so far involved are
in the National Security Division in
main justice and the Eastern District of
Virginia United States Attorney's Office
correct correct but the decision about
prosecuting would be made by their boss
I think is the word you use correct
correct and that would probably be right
now the Deputy Attorney General correct
correct in a matter of complexity and
significance the decision Ultima
citizens the highest level in the
department which would be rod Rosenstein
and let me ask one last question
unrelated you were asked by Senator
Leahy about targets of investigation I
think your comment was that there were
more citizens currently under
investigation for potentially terrorist
violence or extremist violence than
non-citizens
that correct correct in terms of sources
of information are there many
non-citizens who have provided such
information yes and are a large number
of them undocumented residents of the
United States I don't know what
percentage I'm sure some significant
percentage are so cooperation from them
is important and the fear of
apprehension of roundups of mass
detention would be a significant
deterrent
for them would it not in theory I don't
know whether we've seen an impact in
practice though I just don't know as I
sit here could you inquire or do some
internal research to the extent it is
possible and report back to us about
your thank you madam chairman thank you
very much senator director I think this
concludes the hearing let me thank you
for your ability to last for many hours
it's very impressive and let me also
thank ladies and gentlemen in the
audience many of you have been here from
the very beginning thank you for your
attention and thank you for being
respectful it's very much appreciated
and the hearing is adjourned
[Music]
you